CHAPTER I.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND PASSEPARTOUT ACCEPT EACH OTHER, THE ONE ASMASTER, THE OTHER AS MANMr. Phileas Fogg lived, in 1872, at No. 7, Saville Row, BurlingtonGardens, the house in which Sheridan died in 1814. He was one of themost noticeable members of the Reform Club, though he seemed always toavoid attracting attention; an enigmatical personage, about whom littlewas known, except that he was a polished man of the world. People saidthat he resembled Byron—at least that his head was Byronic; but he wasa bearded, tranquil Byron, who might live on a thousand years withoutgrowing old.Certainly an Englishman, it was more doubtful whether Phileas Fogg wasa Londoner. He was never seen on ’Change, nor at the Bank, nor in thecounting-rooms of the “City”; no ships ever came into London docks ofwhich he was the owner; he had no public employment; he had never beenentered at any of the Inns of Court, either at the Temple, or Lincoln’sInn, or Gray’s Inn; nor had his voice ever resounded in the Court ofChancery, or in the Exchequer, or the Queen’s Bench, or theEcclesiastical Courts. He certainly was not a manufacturer; nor was hea merchant or a gentleman farmer. His name was strange to thescientific and learned societies, and he never was known to take partin the sage deliberations of the Royal Institution or the LondonInstitution, the Artisan’s Association, or the Institution of Arts andSciences. He belonged, in fact, to none of the numerous societies whichswarm in the English capital, from the Harmonic to that of theEntomologists, founded mainly for the purpose of abolishing perniciousinsects.Phileas Fogg was a member of the Reform, and that was all.The way in which he got admission to this exclusive club was simpleenough.He was recommended by the Barings, with whom he had an open credit. Hischeques were regularly paid at sight from his account current, whichwas always flush.Was Phileas Fogg rich? Undoubtedly. But those who knew him best couldnot imagine how he had made his fortune, and Mr. Fogg was the lastperson to whom to apply for the information. He was not lavish, nor, onthe contrary, avaricious; for, whenever he knew that money was neededfor a noble, useful, or benevolent purpose, he supplied it quietly andsometimes anonymously. He was, in short, the least communicative ofmen. He talked very little, and seemed all the more mysterious for histaciturn manner. His daily habits were quite open to observation; butwhatever he did was so exactly the same thing that he had always donebefore, that the wits of the curious were fairly puzzled.Had he travelled? It was likely, for no one seemed to know the worldmore familiarly; there was no spot so secluded that he did not appearto have an intimate acquaintance with it. He often corrected, with afew clear words, the thousand conjectures advanced by members of theclub as to lost and unheard-of travellers, pointing out the trueprobabilities, and seeming as if gifted with a sort of second sight, sooften did events justify his predictions. He must have travelledeverywhere, at least in the spirit.It was at least certain that Phileas Fogg had not absented himself fromLondon for many years. Those who were honoured by a better acquaintancewith him than the rest, declared that nobody could pretend to have everseen him anywhere else. His sole pastimes were reading the papers andplaying whist. He often won at this game, which, as a silent one,harmonised with his nature; but his winnings never went into his purse,being reserved as a fund for his charities. Mr. Fogg played, not towin, but for the sake of playing. The game was in his eyes a contest, astruggle with a difficulty, yet a motionless, unwearying struggle,congenial to his tastes.Phileas Fogg was not known to have either wife or children, which mayhappen to the most honest people; either relatives or near friends,which is certainly more unusual. He lived alone in his house in SavilleRow, whither none penetrated. A single domestic sufficed to serve him.He breakfasted and dined at the club, at hours mathematically fixed, inthe same room, at the same table, never taking his meals with othermembers, much less bringing a guest with him; and went home at exactlymidnight, only to retire at once to bed. He never used the cosychambers which the Reform provides for its favoured members. He passedten hours out of the twenty-four in Saville Row, either in sleeping ormaking his toilet. When he chose to take a walk it was with a regularstep in the entrance hall with its mosaic flooring, or in the circulargallery with its dome supported by twenty red porphyry Ionic columns,and illumined by blue painted windows. When he breakfasted or dined allthe resources of the club—its kitchens and pantries, its buttery anddairy—aided to crowd his table with their most succulent stores; he wasserved by the gravest waiters, in dress coats, and shoes with swan-skinsoles, who proffered the viands in special porcelain, and on the finestlinen; club decanters, of a lost mould, contained his sherry, his port,and his cinnamon-spiced claret; while his beverages were refreshinglycooled with ice, brought at great cost from the American lakes.If to live in this style is to be eccentric, it must be confessed thatthere is something good in eccentricity.The mansion in Saville Row, though not sumptuous, was exceedinglycomfortable. The habits of its occupant were such as to demand butlittle from the sole domestic, but Phileas Fogg required him to bealmost superhumanly prompt and regular. On this very 2nd of October hehad dismissed James Forster, because that luckless youth had broughthim shaving-water at eighty-four degrees Fahrenheit instead ofeighty-six; and he was awaiting his successor, who was due at the housebetween eleven and half-past.Phileas Fogg was seated squarely in his armchair, his feet closetogether like those of a grenadier on parade, his hands resting on hisknees, his body straight, his head erect; he was steadily watching acomplicated clock which indicated the hours, the minutes, the seconds,the days, the months, and the years. At exactly half-past eleven Mr.Fogg would, according to his daily habit, quit Saville Row, and repairto the Reform.A rap at this moment sounded on the door of the cosy apartment wherePhileas Fogg was seated, and James Forster, the dismissed servant,appeared.“The new servant,” said he.A young man of thirty advanced and bowed.“You are a Frenchman, I believe,” asked Phileas Fogg, “and your name isJohn?”“Jean, if monsieur pleases,” replied the newcomer, “Jean Passepartout,a surname which has clung to me because I have a natural aptness forgoing out of one business into another. I believe I’m honest, monsieur,but, to be outspoken, I’ve had several trades. I’ve been an itinerantsinger, a circus-rider, when I used to vault like Leotard, and dance ona rope like Blondin. Then I got to be a professor of gymnastics, so asto make better use of my talents; and then I was a sergeant fireman atParis, and assisted at many a big fire. But I quitted France five yearsago, and, wishing to taste the sweets of domestic life, took service asa valet here in England. Finding myself out of place, and hearing thatMonsieur Phileas Fogg was the most exact and settled gentleman in theUnited Kingdom, I have come to monsieur in the hope of living with hima tranquil life, and forgetting even the name of Passepartout.”“Passepartout suits me,” responded Mr. Fogg. “You are well recommendedto me; I hear a good report of you. You know my conditions?”“Yes, monsieur.”“Good! What time is it?”“Twenty-two minutes after eleven,” returned Passepartout, drawing anenormous silver watch from the depths of his pocket.“You are too slow,” said Mr. Fogg.“Pardon me, monsieur, it is impossible—”“You are four minutes too slow. No matter; it’s enough to mention theerror. Now from this moment, twenty-nine minutes after eleven, a.m.,this Wednesday, 2nd October, you are in my service.”Phileas Fogg got up, took his hat in his left hand, put it on his headwith an automatic motion, and went off without a word.Passepartout heard the street door shut once; it was his new mastergoing out. He heard it shut again; it was his predecessor, JamesForster, departing in his turn. Passepartout remained alone in thehouse in Saville Row.CHAPTER II.IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT IS CONVINCED THAT HE HAS AT LAST FOUND HIS IDEAL“Faith,” muttered Passepartout, somewhat flurried, “I’ve seen people atMadame Tussaud’s as lively as my new master!”Madame Tussaud’s “people,” let it be said, are of wax, and are muchvisited in London; speech is all that is wanting to make them human.During his brief interview with Mr. Fogg, Passepartout had beencarefully observing him. He appeared to be a man about forty years ofage, with fine, handsome features, and a tall, well-shaped figure; hishair and whiskers were light, his forehead compact and unwrinkled, hisface rather pale, his teeth magnificent. His countenance possessed inthe highest degree what physiognomists call “repose in action,” aquality of those who act rather than talk. Calm and phlegmatic, with aclear eye, Mr. Fogg seemed a perfect type of that English composurewhich Angelica Kauffmann has so skilfully represented on canvas. Seenin the various phases of his daily life, he gave the idea of beingperfectly well-balanced, as exactly regulated as a Leroy chronometer.Phileas Fogg was, indeed, exactitude personified, and this was betrayedeven in the expression of his very hands and feet; for in men, as wellas in animals, the limbs themselves are expressive of the passions.He was so exact that he was never in a hurry, was always ready, and waseconomical alike of his steps and his motions. He never took one steptoo many, and always went to his destination by the shortest cut; hemade no superfluous gestures, and was never seen to be moved oragitated. He was the most deliberate person in the world, yet alwaysreached his destination at the exact moment.He lived alone, and, so to speak, outside of every social relation; andas he knew that in this world account must be taken of friction, andthat friction retards, he never rubbed against anybody.As for Passepartout, he was a true Parisian of Paris. Since he hadabandoned his own country for England, taking service as a valet, hehad in vain searched for a master after his own heart. Passepartout wasby no means one of those pert dunces depicted by Molière with a boldgaze and a nose held high in the air; he was an honest fellow, with apleasant face, lips a trifle protruding, soft-mannered and serviceable,with a good round head, such as one likes to see on the shoulders of afriend. His eyes were blue, his complexion rubicund, his figure almostportly and well-built, his body muscular, and his physical powers fullydeveloped by the exercises of his younger days. His brown hair wassomewhat tumbled; for, while the ancient sculptors are said to haveknown eighteen methods of arranging Minerva’s tresses, Passepartout wasfamiliar with but one of dressing his own: three strokes of alarge-tooth comb completed his toilet.It would be rash to predict how Passepartout’s lively nature wouldagree with Mr. Fogg. It was impossible to tell whether the new servantwould turn out as absolutely methodical as his master required;experience alone could solve the question. Passepartout had been a sortof vagrant in his early years, and now yearned for repose; but so farhe had failed to find it, though he had already served in ten Englishhouses. But he could not take root in any of these; with chagrin, hefound his masters invariably whimsical and irregular, constantlyrunning about the country, or on the look-out for adventure. His lastmaster, young Lord Longferry, Member of Parliament, after passing hisnights in the Haymarket taverns, was too often brought home in themorning on policemen’s shoulders. Passepartout, desirous of respectingthe gentleman whom he served, ventured a mild remonstrance on suchconduct; which, being ill-received, he took his leave. Hearing that Mr.Phileas Fogg was looking for a servant, and that his life was one ofunbroken regularity, that he neither travelled nor stayed from homeovernight, he felt sure that this would be the place he was after. Hepresented himself, and was accepted, as has been seen.At half-past eleven, then, Passepartout found himself alone in thehouse in Saville Row. He began its inspection without delay, scouringit from cellar to garret. So clean, well-arranged, solemn a mansionpleased him; it seemed to him like a snail’s shell, lighted and warmedby gas, which sufficed for both these purposes. When Passepartoutreached the second story he recognised at once the room which he was toinhabit, and he was well satisfied with it. Electric bells andspeaking-tubes afforded communication with the lower stories; while onthe mantel stood an electric clock, precisely like that in Mr. Fogg’sbedchamber, both beating the same second at the same instant. “That’sgood, that’ll do,” said Passepartout to himself.He suddenly observed, hung over the clock, a card which, uponinspection, proved to be a programme of the daily routine of the house.It comprised all that was required of the servant, from eight in themorning, exactly at which hour Phileas Fogg rose, till half-pasteleven, when he left the house for the Reform Club—all the details ofservice, the tea and toast at twenty-three minutes past eight, theshaving-water at thirty-seven minutes past nine, and the toilet attwenty minutes before ten. Everything was regulated and foreseen thatwas to be done from half-past eleven a.m. till midnight, the hour atwhich the methodical gentleman retired.Mr. Fogg’s wardrobe was amply supplied and in the best taste. Each pairof trousers, coat, and vest bore a number, indicating the time of yearand season at which they were in turn to be laid out for wearing; andthe same system was applied to the master’s shoes. In short, the housein Saville Row, which must have been a very temple of disorder andunrest under the illustrious but dissipated Sheridan, was cosiness,comfort, and method idealised. There was no study, nor were therebooks, which would have been quite useless to Mr. Fogg; for at theReform two libraries, one of general literature and the other of lawand politics, were at his service. A moderate-sized safe stood in hisbedroom, constructed so as to defy fire as well as burglars; butPassepartout found neither arms nor hunting weapons anywhere;everything betrayed the most tranquil and peaceable habits.Having scrutinised the house from top to bottom, he rubbed his hands, abroad smile overspread his features, and he said joyfully, “This isjust what I wanted! Ah, we shall get on together, Mr. Fogg and I! Whata domestic and regular gentleman! A real machine; well, I don’t mindserving a machine.”CHAPTER III.IN WHICH A CONVERSATION TAKES PLACE WHICH SEEMS LIKELY TO COST PHILEASFOGG DEARPhileas Fogg, having shut the door of his house at half-past eleven,and having put his right foot before his left five hundred andseventy-five times, and his left foot before his right five hundred andseventy-six times, reached the Reform Club, an imposing edifice in PallMall, which could not have cost less than three millions. He repairedat once to the dining-room, the nine windows of which open upon atasteful garden, where the trees were already gilded with an autumncolouring; and took his place at the habitual table, the cover of whichhad already been laid for him. His breakfast consisted of a side-dish,a broiled fish with Reading sauce, a scarlet slice of roast beefgarnished with mushrooms, a rhubarb and gooseberry tart, and a morselof Cheshire cheese, the whole being washed down with several cups oftea, for which the Reform is famous. He rose at thirteen minutes toone, and directed his steps towards the large hall, a sumptuousapartment adorned with lavishly-framed paintings. A flunkey handed himan uncut _Times_, which he proceeded to cut with a skill which betrayedfamiliarity with this delicate operation. The perusal of this paperabsorbed Phileas Fogg until a quarter before four, whilst the_Standard_, his next task, occupied him till the dinner hour. Dinnerpassed as breakfast had done, and Mr. Fogg re-appeared in thereading-room and sat down to the _Pall Mall_ at twenty minutes beforesix. Half an hour later several members of the Reform came in and drewup to the fireplace, where a coal fire was steadily burning. They wereMr. Fogg’s usual partners at whist: Andrew Stuart, an engineer; JohnSullivan and Samuel Fallentin, bankers; Thomas Flanagan, a brewer; andGauthier Ralph, one of the Directors of the Bank of England—all richand highly respectable personages, even in a club which comprises theprinces of English trade and finance.“Well, Ralph,” said Thomas Flanagan, “what about that robbery?”“Oh,” replied Stuart, “the Bank will lose the money.”“On the contrary,” broke in Ralph, “I hope we may put our hands on therobber. Skilful detectives have been sent to all the principal ports ofAmerica and the Continent, and he’ll be a clever fellow if he slipsthrough their fingers.”“But have you got the robber’s description?” asked Stuart.“In the first place, he is no robber at all,” returned Ralph,positively.“What! a fellow who makes off with fifty-five thousand pounds, norobber?”“No.”“Perhaps he’s a manufacturer, then.”“The _Daily Telegraph_ says that he is a gentleman.”It was Phileas Fogg, whose head now emerged from behind his newspapers,who made this remark. He bowed to his friends, and entered into theconversation. The affair which formed its subject, and which was towntalk, had occurred three days before at the Bank of England. A packageof banknotes, to the value of fifty-five thousand pounds, had beentaken from the principal cashier’s table, that functionary being at themoment engaged in registering the receipt of three shillings andsixpence. Of course, he could not have his eyes everywhere. Let it beobserved that the Bank of England reposes a touching confidence in thehonesty of the public. There are neither guards nor gratings to protectits treasures; gold, silver, banknotes are freely exposed, at the mercyof the first comer. A keen observer of English customs relates that,being in one of the rooms of the Bank one day, he had the curiosity toexamine a gold ingot weighing some seven or eight pounds. He took itup, scrutinised it, passed it to his neighbour, he to the next man, andso on until the ingot, going from hand to hand, was transferred to theend of a dark entry; nor did it return to its place for half an hour.Meanwhile, the cashier had not so much as raised his head. But in thepresent instance things had not gone so smoothly. The package of notesnot being found when five o’clock sounded from the ponderous clock inthe “drawing office,” the amount was passed to the account of profitand loss. As soon as the robbery was discovered, picked detectiveshastened off to Liverpool, Glasgow, Havre, Suez, Brindisi, New York,and other ports, inspired by the proffered reward of two thousandpounds, and five per cent. on the sum that might be recovered.Detectives were also charged with narrowly watching those who arrivedat or left London by rail, and a judicial examination was at onceentered upon.There were real grounds for supposing, as the _Daily Telegraph_ said,that the thief did not belong to a professional band. On the day of therobbery a well-dressed gentleman of polished manners, and with awell-to-do air, had been observed going to and fro in the paying roomwhere the crime was committed. A description of him was easily procuredand sent to the detectives; and some hopeful spirits, of whom Ralph wasone, did not despair of his apprehension. The papers and clubs werefull of the affair, and everywhere people were discussing theprobabilities of a successful pursuit; and the Reform Club wasespecially agitated, several of its members being Bank officials.Ralph would not concede that the work of the detectives was likely tobe in vain, for he thought that the prize offered would greatlystimulate their zeal and activity. But Stuart was far from sharing thisconfidence; and, as they placed themselves at the whist-table, theycontinued to argue the matter. Stuart and Flanagan played together,while Phileas Fogg had Fallentin for his partner. As the game proceededthe conversation ceased, excepting between the rubbers, when it revivedagain.“I maintain,” said Stuart, “that the chances are in favour of thethief, who must be a shrewd fellow.”“Well, but where can he fly to?” asked Ralph. “No country is safe forhim.”“Pshaw!”“Where could he go, then?”“Oh, I don’t know that. The world is big enough.”“It was once,” said Phileas Fogg, in a low tone. “Cut, sir,” he added,handing the cards to Thomas Flanagan.The discussion fell during the rubber, after which Stuart took up itsthread.“What do you mean by ‘once’? Has the world grown smaller?”“Certainly,” returned Ralph. “I agree with Mr. Fogg. The world hasgrown smaller, since a man can now go round it ten times more quicklythan a hundred years ago. And that is why the search for this thiefwill be more likely to succeed.”“And also why the thief can get away more easily.”“Be so good as to play, Mr. Stuart,” said Phileas Fogg.But the incredulous Stuart was not convinced, and when the hand wasfinished, said eagerly: “You have a strange way, Ralph, of proving thatthe world has grown smaller. So, because you can go round it in threemonths—”“In eighty days,” interrupted Phileas Fogg.“That is true, gentlemen,” added John Sullivan. “Only eighty days, nowthat the section between Rothal and Allahabad, on the Great IndianPeninsula Railway, has been opened. Here is the estimate made by the_Daily Telegraph:_—From London to Suez _viâ_ Mont Cenis and Brindisi, by rail andsteamboats ................. 7 daysFrom Suez to Bombay, by steamer .................... 13 ”From Bombay to Calcutta, by rail ................... 3 ”From Calcutta to Hong Kong, by steamer ............. 13 ”From Hong Kong to Yokohama (Japan), by steamer ..... 6 ”From Yokohama to San Francisco, by steamer ......... 22 ”From San Francisco to New York, by rail ............. 7 ”From New York to London, by steamer and rail ........ 9 ”-------Total ............................................ 80 days.”“Yes, in eighty days!” exclaimed Stuart, who in his excitement made afalse deal. “But that doesn’t take into account bad weather, contrarywinds, shipwrecks, railway accidents, and so on.”“All included,” returned Phileas Fogg, continuing to play despite thediscussion.“But suppose the Hindoos or Indians pull up the rails,” replied Stuart;“suppose they stop the trains, pillage the luggage-vans, and scalp thepassengers!”“All included,” calmly retorted Fogg; adding, as he threw down thecards, “Two trumps.”Stuart, whose turn it was to deal, gathered them up, and went on: “Youare right, theoretically, Mr. Fogg, but practically—”“Practically also, Mr. Stuart.”“I’d like to see you do it in eighty days.”“It depends on you. Shall we go?”“Heaven preserve me! But I would wager four thousand pounds that such ajourney, made under these conditions, is impossible.”“Quite possible, on the contrary,” returned Mr. Fogg.“Well, make it, then!”“The journey round the world in eighty days?”“Yes.”“I should like nothing better.”“When?”“At once. Only I warn you that I shall do it at your expense.”“It’s absurd!” cried Stuart, who was beginning to be annoyed at thepersistency of his friend. “Come, let’s go on with the game.”“Deal over again, then,” said Phileas Fogg. “There’s a false deal.”Stuart took up the pack with a feverish hand; then suddenly put themdown again.“Well, Mr. Fogg,” said he, “it shall be so: I will wager the fourthousand on it.”“Calm yourself, my dear Stuart,” said Fallentin. “It’s only a joke.”“When I say I’ll wager,” returned Stuart, “I mean it.”“All right,” said Mr. Fogg; and, turning to the others, he continued:“I have a deposit of twenty thousand at Baring’s which I will willinglyrisk upon it.”“Twenty thousand pounds!” cried Sullivan. “Twenty thousand pounds,which you would lose by a single accidental delay!”“The unforeseen does not exist,” quietly replied Phileas Fogg.“But, Mr. Fogg, eighty days are only the estimate of the least possibletime in which the journey can be made.”“A well-used minimum suffices for everything.”“But, in order not to exceed it, you must jump mathematically from thetrains upon the steamers, and from the steamers upon the trains again.”“I will jump—mathematically.”“You are joking.”“A true Englishman doesn’t joke when he is talking about so serious athing as a wager,” replied Phileas Fogg, solemnly. “I will bet twentythousand pounds against anyone who wishes that I will make the tour ofthe world in eighty days or less; in nineteen hundred and twenty hours,or a hundred and fifteen thousand two hundred minutes. Do you accept?”“We accept,” replied Messrs. Stuart, Fallentin, Sullivan, Flanagan, andRalph, after consulting each other.“Good,” said Mr. Fogg. “The train leaves for Dover at a quarter beforenine. I will take it.”“This very evening?” asked Stuart.“This very evening,” returned Phileas Fogg. He took out and consulted apocket almanac, and added, “As today is Wednesday, the 2nd of October,I shall be due in London in this very room of the Reform Club, onSaturday, the 21st of December, at a quarter before nine p.m.; or elsethe twenty thousand pounds, now deposited in my name at Baring’s, willbelong to you, in fact and in right, gentlemen. Here is a cheque forthe amount.”A memorandum of the wager was at once drawn up and signed by the sixparties, during which Phileas Fogg preserved a stoical composure. Hecertainly did not bet to win, and had only staked the twenty thousandpounds, half of his fortune, because he foresaw that he might have toexpend the other half to carry out this difficult, not to sayunattainable, project. As for his antagonists, they seemed muchagitated; not so much by the value of their stake, as because they hadsome scruples about betting under conditions so difficult to theirfriend.The clock struck seven, and the party offered to suspend the game sothat Mr. Fogg might make his preparations for departure.“I am quite ready now,” was his tranquil response. “Diamonds aretrumps: be so good as to play, gentlemen.”CHAPTER IV.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG ASTOUNDS PASSEPARTOUT, HIS SERVANTHaving won twenty guineas at whist, and taken leave of his friends,Phileas Fogg, at twenty-five minutes past seven, left the Reform Club.Passepartout, who had conscientiously studied the programme of hisduties, was more than surprised to see his master guilty of theinexactness of appearing at this unaccustomed hour; for, according torule, he was not due in Saville Row until precisely midnight.Mr. Fogg repaired to his bedroom, and called out, “Passepartout!”Passepartout did not reply. It could not be he who was called; it wasnot the right hour.“Passepartout!” repeated Mr. Fogg, without raising his voice.Passepartout made his appearance.“I’ve called you twice,” observed his master.“But it is not midnight,” responded the other, showing his watch.“I know it; I don’t blame you. We start for Dover and Calais in tenminutes.”A puzzled grin overspread Passepartout’s round face; clearly he had notcomprehended his master.“Monsieur is going to leave home?”“Yes,” returned Phileas Fogg. “We are going round the world.”Passepartout opened wide his eyes, raised his eyebrows, held up hishands, and seemed about to collapse, so overcome was he with stupefiedastonishment.“Round the world!” he murmured.“In eighty days,” responded Mr. Fogg. “So we haven’t a moment to lose.”“But the trunks?” gasped Passepartout, unconsciously swaying his headfrom right to left.“We’ll have no trunks; only a carpet-bag, with two shirts and threepairs of stockings for me, and the same for you. We’ll buy our clotheson the way. Bring down my mackintosh and traveling-cloak, and somestout shoes, though we shall do little walking. Make haste!”Passepartout tried to reply, but could not. He went out, mounted to hisown room, fell into a chair, and muttered: “That’s good, that is! AndI, who wanted to remain quiet!”He mechanically set about making the preparations for departure. Aroundthe world in eighty days! Was his master a fool? No. Was this a joke,then? They were going to Dover; good! To Calais; good again! After all,Passepartout, who had been away from France five years, would not besorry to set foot on his native soil again. Perhaps they would go asfar as Paris, and it would do his eyes good to see Paris once more. Butsurely a gentleman so chary of his steps would stop there; nodoubt—but, then, it was none the less true that he was going away, thisso domestic person hitherto!By eight o’clock Passepartout had packed the modest carpet-bag,containing the wardrobes of his master and himself; then, stilltroubled in mind, he carefully shut the door of his room, and descendedto Mr. Fogg.Mr. Fogg was quite ready. Under his arm might have been observed ared-bound copy of Bradshaw’s Continental Railway Steam Transit andGeneral Guide, with its timetables showing the arrival and departure ofsteamers and railways. He took the carpet-bag, opened it, and slippedinto it a goodly roll of Bank of England notes, which would passwherever he might go.“You have forgotten nothing?” asked he.“Nothing, monsieur.”“My mackintosh and cloak?”“Here they are.”“Good! Take this carpet-bag,” handing it to Passepartout. “Take goodcare of it, for there are twenty thousand pounds in it.”Passepartout nearly dropped the bag, as if the twenty thousand poundswere in gold, and weighed him down.Master and man then descended, the street-door was double-locked, andat the end of Saville Row they took a cab and drove rapidly to CharingCross. The cab stopped before the railway station at twenty minutespast eight. Passepartout jumped off the box and followed his master,who, after paying the cabman, was about to enter the station, when apoor beggar-woman, with a child in her arms, her naked feet smearedwith mud, her head covered with a wretched bonnet, from which hung atattered feather, and her shoulders shrouded in a ragged shawl,approached, and mournfully asked for alms.Mr. Fogg took out the twenty guineas he had just won at whist, andhanded them to the beggar, saying, “Here, my good woman. I’m glad thatI met you;” and passed on.Passepartout had a moist sensation about the eyes; his master’s actiontouched his susceptible heart.Two first-class tickets for Paris having been speedily purchased, Mr.Fogg was crossing the station to the train, when he perceived his fivefriends of the Reform.“Well, gentlemen,” said he, “I’m off, you see; and, if you will examinemy passport when I get back, you will be able to judge whether I haveaccomplished the journey agreed upon.”“Oh, that would be quite unnecessary, Mr. Fogg,” said Ralph politely.“We will trust your word, as a gentleman of honour.”“You do not forget when you are due in London again?” asked Stuart.“In eighty days; on Saturday, the 21st of December, 1872, at a quarterbefore nine p.m. Good-bye, gentlemen.”Phileas Fogg and his servant seated themselves in a first-classcarriage at twenty minutes before nine; five minutes later the whistlescreamed, and the train slowly glided out of the station.The night was dark, and a fine, steady rain was falling. Phileas Fogg,snugly ensconced in his corner, did not open his lips. Passepartout,not yet recovered from his stupefaction, clung mechanically to thecarpet-bag, with its enormous treasure.Just as the train was whirling through Sydenham, Passepartout suddenlyuttered a cry of despair.“What’s the matter?” asked Mr. Fogg.“Alas! In my hurry—I—I forgot—”“What?”“To turn off the gas in my room!”“Very well, young man,” returned Mr. Fogg, coolly; “it will burn—atyour expense.”CHAPTER V.IN WHICH A NEW SPECIES OF FUNDS, UNKNOWN TO THE MONEYED MEN, APPEARS ON’CHANGEPhileas Fogg rightly suspected that his departure from London wouldcreate a lively sensation at the West End. The news of the bet spreadthrough the Reform Club, and afforded an exciting topic of conversationto its members. From the club it soon got into the papers throughoutEngland. The boasted “tour of the world” was talked about, disputed,argued with as much warmth as if the subject were another Alabamaclaim. Some took sides with Phileas Fogg, but the large majority shooktheir heads and declared against him; it was absurd, impossible, theydeclared, that the tour of the world could be made, excepttheoretically and on paper, in this minimum of time, and with theexisting means of travelling. The _Times, Standard, Morning Post_, and_Daily News_, and twenty other highly respectable newspapers scoutedMr. Fogg’s project as madness; the _Daily Telegraph_ alone hesitatinglysupported him. People in general thought him a lunatic, and blamed hisReform Club friends for having accepted a wager which betrayed themental aberration of its proposer.Articles no less passionate than logical appeared on the question, forgeography is one of the pet subjects of the English; and the columnsdevoted to Phileas Fogg’s venture were eagerly devoured by all classesof readers. At first some rash individuals, principally of the gentlersex, espoused his cause, which became still more popular when the_Illustrated London News_ came out with his portrait, copied from aphotograph in the Reform Club. A few readers of the _Daily Telegraph_even dared to say, “Why not, after all? Stranger things have come topass.”At last a long article appeared, on the 7th of October, in the bulletinof the Royal Geographical Society, which treated the question fromevery point of view, and demonstrated the utter folly of theenterprise.Everything, it said, was against the travellers, every obstacle imposedalike by man and by nature. A miraculous agreement of the times ofdeparture and arrival, which was impossible, was absolutely necessaryto his success. He might, perhaps, reckon on the arrival of trains atthe designated hours, in Europe, where the distances were relativelymoderate; but when he calculated upon crossing India in three days, andthe United States in seven, could he rely beyond misgiving uponaccomplishing his task? There were accidents to machinery, theliability of trains to run off the line, collisions, bad weather, theblocking up by snow—were not all these against Phileas Fogg? Would henot find himself, when travelling by steamer in winter, at the mercy ofthe winds and fogs? Is it uncommon for the best ocean steamers to betwo or three days behind time? But a single delay would suffice tofatally break the chain of communication; should Phileas Fogg oncemiss, even by an hour; a steamer, he would have to wait for the next,and that would irrevocably render his attempt vain.This article made a great deal of noise, and, being copied into all thepapers, seriously depressed the advocates of the rash tourist.Everybody knows that England is the world of betting men, who are of ahigher class than mere gamblers; to bet is in the English temperament.Not only the members of the Reform, but the general public, made heavywagers for or against Phileas Fogg, who was set down in the bettingbooks as if he were a race-horse. Bonds were issued, and made theirappearance on ’Change; “Phileas Fogg bonds” were offered at par or at apremium, and a great business was done in them. But five days after thearticle in the bulletin of the Geographical Society appeared, thedemand began to subside: “Phileas Fogg” declined. They were offered bypackages, at first of five, then of ten, until at last nobody wouldtake less than twenty, fifty, a hundred!Lord Albemarle, an elderly paralytic gentleman, was now the onlyadvocate of Phileas Fogg left. This noble lord, who was fastened to hischair, would have given his fortune to be able to make the tour of theworld, if it took ten years; and he bet five thousand pounds on PhileasFogg. When the folly as well as the uselessness of the adventure waspointed out to him, he contented himself with replying, “If the thingis feasible, the first to do it ought to be an Englishman.”The Fogg party dwindled more and more, everybody was going against him,and the bets stood a hundred and fifty and two hundred to one; and aweek after his departure an incident occurred which deprived him ofbackers at any price.The commissioner of police was sitting in his office at nine o’clockone evening, when the following telegraphic dispatch was put into hishands:_Suez to London._ROWAN, COMMISSIONER OF POLICE, SCOTLAND YARD:    I’ve found the bank robber, Phileas Fogg. Send without delay    warrant of arrest to Bombay.FIX, _Detective_.The effect of this dispatch was instantaneous. The polished gentlemandisappeared to give place to the bank robber. His photograph, which washung with those of the rest of the members at the Reform Club, wasminutely examined, and it betrayed, feature by feature, the descriptionof the robber which had been provided to the police. The mysterioushabits of Phileas Fogg were recalled; his solitary ways, his suddendeparture; and it seemed clear that, in undertaking a tour round theworld on the pretext of a wager, he had had no other end in view thanto elude the detectives, and throw them off his track.CHAPTER VI.IN WHICH FIX, THE DETECTIVE, BETRAYS A VERY NATURAL IMPATIENCEThe circumstances under which this telegraphic dispatch about PhileasFogg was sent were as follows:The steamer “Mongolia,” belonging to the Peninsular and OrientalCompany, built of iron, of two thousand eight hundred tons burden, andfive hundred horse-power, was due at eleven o’clock a.m. on Wednesday,the 9th of October, at Suez. The “Mongolia” plied regularly betweenBrindisi and Bombay _viâ_ the Suez Canal, and was one of the fasteststeamers belonging to the company, always making more than ten knots anhour between Brindisi and Suez, and nine and a half between Suez andBombay.Two men were promenading up and down the wharves, among the crowd ofnatives and strangers who were sojourning at this once stragglingvillage—now, thanks to the enterprise of M. Lesseps, a fast-growingtown. One was the British consul at Suez, who, despite the propheciesof the English Government, and the unfavourable predictions ofStephenson, was in the habit of seeing, from his office window, Englishships daily passing to and fro on the great canal, by which the oldroundabout route from England to India by the Cape of Good Hope wasabridged by at least a half. The other was a small, slight-builtpersonage, with a nervous, intelligent face, and bright eyes peeringout from under eyebrows which he was incessantly twitching. He was justnow manifesting unmistakable signs of impatience, nervously pacing upand down, and unable to stand still for a moment. This was Fix, one ofthe detectives who had been dispatched from England in search of thebank robber; it was his task to narrowly watch every passenger whoarrived at Suez, and to follow up all who seemed to be suspiciouscharacters, or bore a resemblance to the description of the criminal,which he had received two days before from the police headquarters atLondon. The detective was evidently inspired by the hope of obtainingthe splendid reward which would be the prize of success, and awaitedwith a feverish impatience, easy to understand, the arrival of thesteamer “Mongolia.”“So you say, consul,” asked he for the twentieth time, “that thissteamer is never behind time?”“No, Mr. Fix,” replied the consul. “She was bespoken yesterday at PortSaid, and the rest of the way is of no account to such a craft. Irepeat that the ‘Mongolia’ has been in advance of the time required bythe company’s regulations, and gained the prize awarded for excess ofspeed.”“Does she come directly from Brindisi?”“Directly from Brindisi; she takes on the Indian mails there, and sheleft there Saturday at five p.m. Have patience, Mr. Fix; she will notbe late. But really, I don’t see how, from the description you have,you will be able to recognise your man, even if he is on board the‘Mongolia.’”“A man rather feels the presence of these fellows, consul, thanrecognises them. You must have a scent for them, and a scent is like asixth sense which combines hearing, seeing, and smelling. I’ve arrestedmore than one of these gentlemen in my time, and, if my thief is onboard, I’ll answer for it; he’ll not slip through my fingers.”“I hope so, Mr. Fix, for it was a heavy robbery.”“A magnificent robbery, consul; fifty-five thousand pounds! We don’toften have such windfalls. Burglars are getting to be so contemptiblenowadays! A fellow gets hung for a handful of shillings!”“Mr. Fix,” said the consul, “I like your way of talking, and hopeyou’ll succeed; but I fear you will find it far from easy. Don’t yousee, the description which you have there has a singular resemblance toan honest man?”“Consul,” remarked the detective, dogmatically, “great robbers alwaysresemble honest folks. Fellows who have rascally faces have only onecourse to take, and that is to remain honest; otherwise they would bearrested off-hand. The artistic thing is, to unmask honestcountenances; it’s no light task, I admit, but a real art.”Mr. Fix evidently was not wanting in a tinge of self-conceit.Little by little the scene on the quay became more animated; sailors ofvarious nations, merchants, ship-brokers, porters, fellahs, bustled toand fro as if the steamer were immediately expected. The weather wasclear, and slightly chilly. The minarets of the town loomed above thehouses in the pale rays of the sun. A jetty pier, some two thousandyards along, extended into the roadstead. A number of fishing-smacksand coasting boats, some retaining the fantastic fashion of ancientgalleys, were discernible on the Red Sea.As he passed among the busy crowd, Fix, according to habit, scrutinisedthe passers-by with a keen, rapid glance.It was now half-past ten.“The steamer doesn’t come!” he exclaimed, as the port clock struck.“She can’t be far off now,” returned his companion.“How long will she stop at Suez?”“Four hours; long enough to get in her coal. It is thirteen hundred andten miles from Suez to Aden, at the other end of the Red Sea, and shehas to take in a fresh coal supply.”“And does she go from Suez directly to Bombay?”“Without putting in anywhere.”“Good!” said Fix. “If the robber is on board he will no doubt get offat Suez, so as to reach the Dutch or French colonies in Asia by someother route. He ought to know that he would not be safe an hour inIndia, which is English soil.”“Unless,” objected the consul, “he is exceptionally shrewd. An Englishcriminal, you know, is always better concealed in London than anywhereelse.”This observation furnished the detective food for thought, andmeanwhile the consul went away to his office. Fix, left alone, was moreimpatient than ever, having a presentiment that the robber was on boardthe “Mongolia.” If he had indeed left London intending to reach the NewWorld, he would naturally take the route _viâ_ India, which was lesswatched and more difficult to watch than that of the Atlantic. ButFix’s reflections were soon interrupted by a succession of sharpwhistles, which announced the arrival of the “Mongolia.” The portersand fellahs rushed down the quay, and a dozen boats pushed off from theshore to go and meet the steamer. Soon her gigantic hull appearedpassing along between the banks, and eleven o’clock struck as sheanchored in the road. She brought an unusual number of passengers, someof whom remained on deck to scan the picturesque panorama of the town,while the greater part disembarked in the boats, and landed on thequay.Fix took up a position, and carefully examined each face and figurewhich made its appearance. Presently one of the passengers, aftervigorously pushing his way through the importunate crowd of porters,came up to him and politely asked if he could point out the Englishconsulate, at the same time showing a passport which he wished to have_visaed_. Fix instinctively took the passport, and with a rapid glanceread the description of its bearer. An involuntary motion of surprisenearly escaped him, for the description in the passport was identicalwith that of the bank robber which he had received from Scotland Yard.“Is this your passport?” asked he.“No, it’s my master’s.”“And your master is—”“He stayed on board.”“But he must go to the consul’s in person, so as to establish hisidentity.”“Oh, is that necessary?”“Quite indispensable.”“And where is the consulate?”“There, on the corner of the square,” said Fix, pointing to a house twohundred steps off.“I’ll go and fetch my master, who won’t be much pleased, however, to bedisturbed.”The passenger bowed to Fix, and returned to the steamer.CHAPTER VII.WHICH ONCE MORE DEMONSTRATES THE USELESSNESS OF PASSPORTS AS AIDS TODETECTIVESThe detective passed down the quay, and rapidly made his way to theconsul’s office, where he was at once admitted to the presence of thatofficial.“Consul,” said he, without preamble, “I have strong reasons forbelieving that my man is a passenger on the ‘Mongolia.’” And henarrated what had just passed concerning the passport.“Well, Mr. Fix,” replied the consul, “I shall not be sorry to see therascal’s face; but perhaps he won’t come here—that is, if he is theperson you suppose him to be. A robber doesn’t quite like to leavetraces of his flight behind him; and, besides, he is not obliged tohave his passport countersigned.”“If he is as shrewd as I think he is, consul, he will come.”“To have his passport _visaed?_”“Yes. Passports are only good for annoying honest folks, and aiding inthe flight of rogues. I assure you it will be quite the thing for himto do; but I hope you will not _visa_ the passport.”“Why not? If the passport is genuine I have no right to refuse.”“Still, I must keep this man here until I can get a warrant to arresthim from London.”“Ah, that’s your look-out. But I cannot—”The consul did not finish his sentence, for as he spoke a knock washeard at the door, and two strangers entered, one of whom was theservant whom Fix had met on the quay. The other, who was his master,held out his passport with the request that the consul would do him thefavour to _visa_ it. The consul took the document and carefully readit, whilst Fix observed, or rather devoured, the stranger with his eyesfrom a corner of the room.“You are Mr. Phileas Fogg?” said the consul, after reading thepassport.“I am.”“And this man is your servant?”“He is: a Frenchman, named Passepartout.”“You are from London?”“Yes.”“And you are going—”“To Bombay.”“Very good, sir. You know that a _visa_ is useless, and that nopassport is required?”“I know it, sir,” replied Phileas Fogg; “but I wish to prove, by your_visa_, that I came by Suez.”“Very well, sir.”The consul proceeded to sign and date the passport, after which headded his official seal. Mr. Fogg paid the customary fee, coldly bowed,and went out, followed by his servant.“Well?” queried the detective.“Well, he looks and acts like a perfectly honest man,” replied theconsul.“Possibly; but that is not the question. Do you think, consul, thatthis phlegmatic gentleman resembles, feature by feature, the robberwhose description I have received?”“I concede that; but then, you know, all descriptions—”“I’ll make certain of it,” interrupted Fix. “The servant seems to meless mysterious than the master; besides, he’s a Frenchman, and can’thelp talking. Excuse me for a little while, consul.”Fix started off in search of Passepartout.Meanwhile Mr. Fogg, after leaving the consulate, repaired to the quay,gave some orders to Passepartout, went off to the “Mongolia” in a boat,and descended to his cabin. He took up his note-book, which containedthe following memoranda:“Left London, Wednesday, October 2nd, at 8.45 p.m.“Reached Paris, Thursday, October 3rd, at 7.20 a.m.“Left Paris, Thursday, at 8.40 a.m.“Reached Turin by Mont Cenis, Friday, October 4th, at 6.35 a.m.“Left Turin, Friday, at 7.20 a.m.“Arrived at Brindisi, Saturday, October 5th, at 4 p.m.“Sailed on the ‘Mongolia,’ Saturday, at 5 p.m.“Reached Suez, Wednesday, October 9th, at 11 a.m.“Total of hours spent, 158½; or, in days, six days and a half.”These dates were inscribed in an itinerary divided into columns,indicating the month, the day of the month, and the day for thestipulated and actual arrivals at each principal point Paris, Brindisi,Suez, Bombay, Calcutta, Singapore, Hong Kong, Yokohama, San Francisco,New York, and London—from the 2nd of October to the 21st of December;and giving a space for setting down the gain made or the loss sufferedon arrival at each locality. This methodical record thus contained anaccount of everything needed, and Mr. Fogg always knew whether he wasbehind-hand or in advance of his time. On this Friday, October 9th, henoted his arrival at Suez, and observed that he had as yet neithergained nor lost. He sat down quietly to breakfast in his cabin, neveronce thinking of inspecting the town, being one of those Englishmen whoare wont to see foreign countries through the eyes of their domestics.CHAPTER VIII.IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT TALKS RATHER MORE, PERHAPS, THAN IS PRUDENTFix soon rejoined Passepartout, who was lounging and looking about onthe quay, as if he did not feel that he, at least, was obliged not tosee anything.“Well, my friend,” said the detective, coming up with him, “is yourpassport _visaed?_”“Ah, it’s you, is it, monsieur?” responded Passepartout. “Thanks, yes,the passport is all right.”“And you are looking about you?”“Yes; but we travel so fast that I seem to be journeying in a dream. Sothis is Suez?”“Yes.”“In Egypt?”“Certainly, in Egypt.”“And in Africa?”“In Africa.”“In Africa!” repeated Passepartout. “Just think, monsieur, I had noidea that we should go farther than Paris; and all that I saw of Pariswas between twenty minutes past seven and twenty minutes before nine inthe morning, between the Northern and the Lyons stations, through thewindows of a car, and in a driving rain! How I regret not having seenonce more Père la Chaise and the circus in the Champs Elysées!”“You are in a great hurry, then?”“I am not, but my master is. By the way, I must buy some shoes andshirts. We came away without trunks, only with a carpet-bag.”“I will show you an excellent shop for getting what you want.”“Really, monsieur, you are very kind.”And they walked off together, Passepartout chatting volubly as theywent along.“Above all,” said he; “don’t let me lose the steamer.”“You have plenty of time; it’s only twelve o’clock.”Passepartout pulled out his big watch. “Twelve!” he exclaimed; “why,it’s only eight minutes before ten.”“Your watch is slow.”“My watch? A family watch, monsieur, which has come down from mygreat-grandfather! It doesn’t vary five minutes in the year. It’s aperfect chronometer, look you.”“I see how it is,” said Fix. “You have kept London time, which is twohours behind that of Suez. You ought to regulate your watch at noon ineach country.”“I regulate my watch? Never!”“Well, then, it will not agree with the sun.”“So much the worse for the sun, monsieur. The sun will be wrong, then!”And the worthy fellow returned the watch to its fob with a defiantgesture. After a few minutes silence, Fix resumed: “You left Londonhastily, then?”“I rather think so! Last Friday at eight o’clock in the evening,Monsieur Fogg came home from his club, and three-quarters of an hourafterwards we were off.”“But where is your master going?”“Always straight ahead. He is going round the world.”“Round the world?” cried Fix.“Yes, and in eighty days! He says it is on a wager; but, between us, Idon’t believe a word of it. That wouldn’t be common sense. There’ssomething else in the wind.”“Ah! Mr. Fogg is a character, is he?”“I should say he was.”“Is he rich?”“No doubt, for he is carrying an enormous sum in brand new banknoteswith him. And he doesn’t spare the money on the way, either: he hasoffered a large reward to the engineer of the ‘Mongolia’ if he gets usto Bombay well in advance of time.”“And you have known your master a long time?”“Why, no; I entered his service the very day we left London.”The effect of these replies upon the already suspicious and exciteddetective may be imagined. The hasty departure from London soon afterthe robbery; the large sum carried by Mr. Fogg; his eagerness to reachdistant countries; the pretext of an eccentric and foolhardy bet—allconfirmed Fix in his theory. He continued to pump poor Passepartout,and learned that he really knew little or nothing of his master, wholived a solitary existence in London, was said to be rich, though noone knew whence came his riches, and was mysterious and impenetrable inhis affairs and habits. Fix felt sure that Phileas Fogg would not landat Suez, but was really going on to Bombay.“Is Bombay far from here?” asked Passepartout.“Pretty far. It is a ten days’ voyage by sea.”“And in what country is Bombay?”“India.”“In Asia?”“Certainly.”“The deuce! I was going to tell you there’s one thing that worriesme—my burner!”“What burner?”“My gas-burner, which I forgot to turn off, and which is at this momentburning at my expense. I have calculated, monsieur, that I lose twoshillings every four and twenty hours, exactly sixpence more than Iearn; and you will understand that the longer our journey—”Did Fix pay any attention to Passepartout’s trouble about the gas? Itis not probable. He was not listening, but was cogitating a project.Passepartout and he had now reached the shop, where Fix left hiscompanion to make his purchases, after recommending him not to miss thesteamer, and hurried back to the consulate. Now that he was fullyconvinced, Fix had quite recovered his equanimity.“Consul,” said he, “I have no longer any doubt. I have spotted my man.He passes himself off as an odd stick who is going round the world ineighty days.”“Then he’s a sharp fellow,” returned the consul, “and counts onreturning to London after putting the police of the two countries offhis track.”“We’ll see about that,” replied Fix.“But are you not mistaken?”“I am not mistaken.”“Why was this robber so anxious to prove, by the _visa_, that he hadpassed through Suez?”“Why? I have no idea; but listen to me.”He reported in a few words the most important parts of his conversationwith Passepartout.“In short,” said the consul, “appearances are wholly against this man.And what are you going to do?”“Send a dispatch to London for a warrant of arrest to be dispatchedinstantly to Bombay, take passage on board the ‘Mongolia,’ follow myrogue to India, and there, on English ground, arrest him politely, withmy warrant in my hand, and my hand on his shoulder.”Having uttered these words with a cool, careless air, the detectivetook leave of the consul, and repaired to the telegraph office, whencehe sent the dispatch which we have seen to the London police office. Aquarter of an hour later found Fix, with a small bag in his hand,proceeding on board the “Mongolia;” and, ere many moments longer, thenoble steamer rode out at full steam upon the waters of the Red Sea.CHAPTER IX.IN WHICH THE RED SEA AND THE INDIAN OCEAN PROVE PROPITIOUS TO THEDESIGNS OF PHILEAS FOGGThe distance between Suez and Aden is precisely thirteen hundred andten miles, and the regulations of the company allow the steamers onehundred and thirty-eight hours in which to traverse it. The “Mongolia,”thanks to the vigorous exertions of the engineer, seemed likely, sorapid was her speed, to reach her destination considerably within thattime. The greater part of the passengers from Brindisi were bound forIndia some for Bombay, others for Calcutta by way of Bombay, thenearest route thither, now that a railway crosses the Indian peninsula.Among the passengers was a number of officials and military officers ofvarious grades, the latter being either attached to the regular Britishforces or commanding the Sepoy troops, and receiving high salaries eversince the central government has assumed the powers of the East IndiaCompany: for the sub-lieutenants get £280, brigadiers, £2,400, andgenerals of divisions, £4,000. What with the military men, a number ofrich young Englishmen on their travels, and the hospitable efforts ofthe purser, the time passed quickly on the “Mongolia.” The best of farewas spread upon the cabin tables at breakfast, lunch, dinner, and theeight o’clock supper, and the ladies scrupulously changed their toiletstwice a day; and the hours were whirled away, when the sea wastranquil, with music, dancing, and games.But the Red Sea is full of caprice, and often boisterous, like mostlong and narrow gulfs. When the wind came from the African or Asiancoast the “Mongolia,” with her long hull, rolled fearfully. Then theladies speedily disappeared below; the pianos were silent; singing anddancing suddenly ceased. Yet the good ship ploughed straight on,unretarded by wind or wave, towards the straits of Bab-el-Mandeb. Whatwas Phileas Fogg doing all this time? It might be thought that, in hisanxiety, he would be constantly watching the changes of the wind, thedisorderly raging of the billows—every chance, in short, which mightforce the “Mongolia” to slacken her speed, and thus interrupt hisjourney. But, if he thought of these possibilities, he did not betraythe fact by any outward sign.Always the same impassible member of the Reform Club, whom no incidentcould surprise, as unvarying as the ship’s chronometers, and seldomhaving the curiosity even to go upon the deck, he passed through thememorable scenes of the Red Sea with cold indifference; did not care torecognise the historic towns and villages which, along its borders,raised their picturesque outlines against the sky; and betrayed no fearof the dangers of the Arabic Gulf, which the old historians alwaysspoke of with horror, and upon which the ancient navigators neverventured without propitiating the gods by ample sacrifices. How didthis eccentric personage pass his time on the “Mongolia”? He made hisfour hearty meals every day, regardless of the most persistent rollingand pitching on the part of the steamer; and he played whistindefatigably, for he had found partners as enthusiastic in the game ashimself. A tax-collector, on the way to his post at Goa; the Rev.Decimus Smith, returning to his parish at Bombay; and abrigadier-general of the English army, who was about to rejoin hisbrigade at Benares, made up the party, and, with Mr. Fogg, played whistby the hour together in absorbing silence.As for Passepartout, he, too, had escaped sea-sickness, and took hismeals conscientiously in the forward cabin. He rather enjoyed thevoyage, for he was well fed and well lodged, took a great interest inthe scenes through which they were passing, and consoled himself withthe delusion that his master’s whim would end at Bombay. He waspleased, on the day after leaving Suez, to find on deck the obligingperson with whom he had walked and chatted on the quays.“If I am not mistaken,” said he, approaching this person, with his mostamiable smile, “you are the gentleman who so kindly volunteered toguide me at Suez?”“Ah! I quite recognise you. You are the servant of the strangeEnglishman—”“Just so, monsieur—”“Fix.”“Monsieur Fix,” resumed Passepartout, “I’m charmed to find you onboard. Where are you bound?”“Like you, to Bombay.”“That’s capital! Have you made this trip before?”“Several times. I am one of the agents of the Peninsular Company.”“Then you know India?”“Why yes,” replied Fix, who spoke cautiously.“A curious place, this India?”“Oh, very curious. Mosques, minarets, temples, fakirs, pagodas, tigers,snakes, elephants! I hope you will have ample time to see the sights.”“I hope so, Monsieur Fix. You see, a man of sound sense ought not tospend his life jumping from a steamer upon a railway train, and from arailway train upon a steamer again, pretending to make the tour of theworld in eighty days! No; all these gymnastics, you may be sure, willcease at Bombay.”“And Mr. Fogg is getting on well?” asked Fix, in the most natural tonein the world.“Quite well, and I too. I eat like a famished ogre; it’s the sea air.”“But I never see your master on deck.”“Never; he hasn’t the least curiosity.”“Do you know, Mr. Passepartout, that this pretended tour in eighty daysmay conceal some secret errand—perhaps a diplomatic mission?”“Faith, Monsieur Fix, I assure you I know nothing about it, nor would Igive half a crown to find out.”After this meeting, Passepartout and Fix got into the habit of chattingtogether, the latter making it a point to gain the worthy man’sconfidence. He frequently offered him a glass of whiskey or pale ale inthe steamer bar-room, which Passepartout never failed to accept withgraceful alacrity, mentally pronouncing Fix the best of good fellows.Meanwhile the “Mongolia” was pushing forward rapidly; on the 13th,Mocha, surrounded by its ruined walls whereon date-trees were growing,was sighted, and on the mountains beyond were espied vastcoffee-fields. Passepartout was ravished to behold this celebratedplace, and thought that, with its circular walls and dismantled fort,it looked like an immense coffee-cup and saucer. The following nightthey passed through the Strait of Bab-el-Mandeb, which means in Arabic“The Bridge of Tears,” and the next day they put in at Steamer Point,north-west of Aden harbour, to take in coal. This matter of fuellingsteamers is a serious one at such distances from the coal-mines; itcosts the Peninsular Company some eight hundred thousand pounds a year.In these distant seas, coal is worth three or four pounds sterling aton.The “Mongolia” had still sixteen hundred and fifty miles to traversebefore reaching Bombay, and was obliged to remain four hours at SteamerPoint to coal up. But this delay, as it was foreseen, did not affectPhileas Fogg’s programme; besides, the “Mongolia,” instead of reachingAden on the morning of the 15th, when she was due, arrived there on theevening of the 14th, a gain of fifteen hours.Mr. Fogg and his servant went ashore at Aden to have the passport again_visaed;_ Fix, unobserved, followed them. The _visa_ procured, Mr. Foggreturned on board to resume his former habits; while Passepartout,according to custom, sauntered about among the mixed population ofSomalis, Banyans, Parsees, Jews, Arabs, and Europeans who comprise thetwenty-five thousand inhabitants of Aden. He gazed with wonder upon thefortifications which make this place the Gibraltar of the Indian Ocean,and the vast cisterns where the English engineers were still at work,two thousand years after the engineers of Solomon.“Very curious, _very_ curious,” said Passepartout to himself, onreturning to the steamer. “I see that it is by no means useless totravel, if a man wants to see something new.” At six p.m. the“Mongolia” slowly moved out of the roadstead, and was soon once more onthe Indian Ocean. She had a hundred and sixty-eight hours in which toreach Bombay, and the sea was favourable, the wind being in thenorth-west, and all sails aiding the engine. The steamer rolled butlittle, the ladies, in fresh toilets, reappeared on deck, and thesinging and dancing were resumed. The trip was being accomplished mostsuccessfully, and Passepartout was enchanted with the congenialcompanion which chance had secured him in the person of the delightfulFix. On Sunday, October 20th, towards noon, they came in sight of theIndian coast: two hours later the pilot came on board. A range of hillslay against the sky in the horizon, and soon the rows of palms whichadorn Bombay came distinctly into view. The steamer entered the roadformed by the islands in the bay, and at half-past four she hauled upat the quays of Bombay.Phileas Fogg was in the act of finishing the thirty-third rubber of thevoyage, and his partner and himself having, by a bold stroke, capturedall thirteen of the tricks, concluded this fine campaign with abrilliant victory.The “Mongolia” was due at Bombay on the 22nd; she arrived on the 20th.This was a gain to Phileas Fogg of two days since his departure fromLondon, and he calmly entered the fact in the itinerary, in the columnof gains.CHAPTER X.IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT IS ONLY TOO GLAD TO GET OFF WITH THE LOSS OF HISSHOESEverybody knows that the great reversed triangle of land, with its basein the north and its apex in the south, which is called India, embracesfourteen hundred thousand square miles, upon which is spread unequallya population of one hundred and eighty millions of souls. The BritishCrown exercises a real and despotic dominion over the larger portion ofthis vast country, and has a governor-general stationed at Calcutta,governors at Madras, Bombay, and in Bengal, and a lieutenant-governorat Agra.But British India, properly so called, only embraces seven hundredthousand square miles, and a population of from one hundred to onehundred and ten millions of inhabitants. A considerable portion ofIndia is still free from British authority; and there are certainferocious rajahs in the interior who are absolutely independent. Thecelebrated East India Company was all-powerful from 1756, when theEnglish first gained a foothold on the spot where now stands the cityof Madras, down to the time of the great Sepoy insurrection. Itgradually annexed province after province, purchasing them of thenative chiefs, whom it seldom paid, and appointed the governor-generaland his subordinates, civil and military. But the East India Companyhas now passed away, leaving the British possessions in India directlyunder the control of the Crown. The aspect of the country, as well asthe manners and distinctions of race, is daily changing.Formerly one was obliged to travel in India by the old cumbrous methodsof going on foot or on horseback, in palanquins or unwieldy coaches;now fast steamboats ply on the Indus and the Ganges, and a greatrailway, with branch lines joining the main line at many points on itsroute, traverses the peninsula from Bombay to Calcutta in three days.This railway does not run in a direct line across India. The distancebetween Bombay and Calcutta, as the bird flies, is only from onethousand to eleven hundred miles; but the deflections of the roadincrease this distance by more than a third.The general route of the Great Indian Peninsula Railway is as follows:Leaving Bombay, it passes through Salcette, crossing to the continentopposite Tannah, goes over the chain of the Western Ghauts, runs thencenorth-east as far as Burhampoor, skirts the nearly independentterritory of Bundelcund, ascends to Allahabad, turns thence eastwardly,meeting the Ganges at Benares, then departs from the river a little,and, descending south-eastward by Burdivan and the French town ofChandernagor, has its terminus at Calcutta.The passengers of the “Mongolia” went ashore at half-past four p.m.; atexactly eight the train would start for Calcutta.Mr. Fogg, after bidding good-bye to his whist partners, left thesteamer, gave his servant several errands to do, urged it upon him tobe at the station promptly at eight, and, with his regular step, whichbeat to the second, like an astronomical clock, directed his steps tothe passport office. As for the wonders of Bombay—its famous city hall,its splendid library, its forts and docks, its bazaars, mosques,synagogues, its Armenian churches, and the noble pagoda on MalabarHill, with its two polygonal towers—he cared not a straw to see them.He would not deign to examine even the masterpieces of Elephanta, orthe mysterious hypogea, concealed south-east from the docks, or thosefine remains of Buddhist architecture, the Kanherian grottoes of theisland of Salcette.Having transacted his business at the passport office, Phileas Foggrepaired quietly to the railway station, where he ordered dinner. Amongthe dishes served up to him, the landlord especially recommended acertain giblet of “native rabbit,” on which he prided himself.Mr. Fogg accordingly tasted the dish, but, despite its spiced sauce,found it far from palatable. He rang for the landlord, and, on hisappearance, said, fixing his clear eyes upon him, “Is this rabbit,sir?”“Yes, my lord,” the rogue boldly replied, “rabbit from the jungles.”“And this rabbit did not mew when he was killed?”“Mew, my lord! What, a rabbit mew! I swear to you—”“Be so good, landlord, as not to swear, but remember this: cats wereformerly considered, in India, as sacred animals. That was a goodtime.”“For the cats, my lord?”“Perhaps for the travellers as well!”After which Mr. Fogg quietly continued his dinner. Fix had gone onshore shortly after Mr. Fogg, and his first destination was theheadquarters of the Bombay police. He made himself known as a Londondetective, told his business at Bombay, and the position of affairsrelative to the supposed robber, and nervously asked if a warrant hadarrived from London. It had not reached the office; indeed, there hadnot yet been time for it to arrive. Fix was sorely disappointed, andtried to obtain an order of arrest from the director of the Bombaypolice. This the director refused, as the matter concerned the Londonoffice, which alone could legally deliver the warrant. Fix did notinsist, and was fain to resign himself to await the arrival of theimportant document; but he was determined not to lose sight of themysterious rogue as long as he stayed in Bombay. He did not doubt for amoment, any more than Passepartout, that Phileas Fogg would remainthere, at least until it was time for the warrant to arrive.Passepartout, however, had no sooner heard his master’s orders onleaving the “Mongolia” than he saw at once that they were to leaveBombay as they had done Suez and Paris, and that the journey would beextended at least as far as Calcutta, and perhaps beyond that place. Hebegan to ask himself if this bet that Mr. Fogg talked about was notreally in good earnest, and whether his fate was not in truth forcinghim, despite his love of repose, around the world in eighty days!Having purchased the usual quota of shirts and shoes, he took aleisurely promenade about the streets, where crowds of people of manynationalities—Europeans, Persians with pointed caps, Banyas with roundturbans, Sindes with square bonnets, Parsees with black mitres, andlong-robed Armenians—were collected. It happened to be the day of aParsee festival. These descendants of the sect of Zoroaster—the mostthrifty, civilised, intelligent, and austere of the East Indians, amongwhom are counted the richest native merchants of Bombay—werecelebrating a sort of religious carnival, with processions and shows,in the midst of which Indian dancing-girls, clothed in rose-colouredgauze, looped up with gold and silver, danced airily, but with perfectmodesty, to the sound of viols and the clanging of tambourines. It isneedless to say that Passepartout watched these curious ceremonies withstaring eyes and gaping mouth, and that his countenance was that of thegreenest booby imaginable.Unhappily for his master, as well as himself, his curiosity drew himunconsciously farther off than he intended to go. At last, having seenthe Parsee carnival wind away in the distance, he was turning his stepstowards the station, when he happened to espy the splendid pagoda onMalabar Hill, and was seized with an irresistible desire to see itsinterior. He was quite ignorant that it is forbidden to Christians toenter certain Indian temples, and that even the faithful must not go inwithout first leaving their shoes outside the door. It may be said herethat the wise policy of the British Government severely punishes adisregard of the practices of the native religions.Passepartout, however, thinking no harm, went in like a simple tourist,and was soon lost in admiration of the splendid Brahmin ornamentationwhich everywhere met his eyes, when of a sudden he found himselfsprawling on the sacred flagging. He looked up to behold three enragedpriests, who forthwith fell upon him; tore off his shoes, and began tobeat him with loud, savage exclamations. The agile Frenchman was soonupon his feet again, and lost no time in knocking down two of hislong-gowned adversaries with his fists and a vigorous application ofhis toes; then, rushing out of the pagoda as fast as his legs couldcarry him, he soon escaped the third priest by mingling with the crowdin the streets.At five minutes before eight, Passepartout, hatless, shoeless, andhaving in the squabble lost his package of shirts and shoes, rushedbreathlessly into the station.Fix, who had followed Mr. Fogg to the station, and saw that he wasreally going to leave Bombay, was there, upon the platform. He hadresolved to follow the supposed robber to Calcutta, and farther, ifnecessary. Passepartout did not observe the detective, who stood in anobscure corner; but Fix heard him relate his adventures in a few wordsto Mr. Fogg.“I hope that this will not happen again,” said Phileas Fogg coldly, ashe got into the train. Poor Passepartout, quite crestfallen, followedhis master without a word. Fix was on the point of entering anothercarriage, when an idea struck him which induced him to alter his plan.“No, I’ll stay,” muttered he. “An offence has been committed on Indiansoil. I’ve got my man.”Just then the locomotive gave a sharp screech, and the train passed outinto the darkness of the night.CHAPTER XI.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG SECURES A CURIOUS MEANS OF CONVEYANCE AT AFABULOUS PRICEThe train had started punctually. Among the passengers were a number ofofficers, Government officials, and opium and indigo merchants, whosebusiness called them to the eastern coast. Passepartout rode in thesame carriage with his master, and a third passenger occupied a seatopposite to them. This was Sir Francis Cromarty, one of Mr. Fogg’swhist partners on the “Mongolia,” now on his way to join his corps atBenares. Sir Francis was a tall, fair man of fifty, who had greatlydistinguished himself in the last Sepoy revolt. He made India his home,only paying brief visits to England at rare intervals; and was almostas familiar as a native with the customs, history, and character ofIndia and its people. But Phileas Fogg, who was not travelling, butonly describing a circumference, took no pains to inquire into thesesubjects; he was a solid body, traversing an orbit around theterrestrial globe, according to the laws of rational mechanics. He wasat this moment calculating in his mind the number of hours spent sincehis departure from London, and, had it been in his nature to make auseless demonstration, would have rubbed his hands for satisfaction.Sir Francis Cromarty had observed the oddity of his travellingcompanion—although the only opportunity he had for studying him hadbeen while he was dealing the cards, and between two rubbers—andquestioned himself whether a human heart really beat beneath this coldexterior, and whether Phileas Fogg had any sense of the beauties ofnature. The brigadier-general was free to mentally confess that, of allthe eccentric persons he had ever met, none was comparable to thisproduct of the exact sciences.Phileas Fogg had not concealed from Sir Francis his design of goinground the world, nor the circumstances under which he set out; and thegeneral only saw in the wager a useless eccentricity and a lack ofsound common sense. In the way this strange gentleman was going on, hewould leave the world without having done any good to himself oranybody else.An hour after leaving Bombay the train had passed the viaducts and theIsland of Salcette, and had got into the open country. At Callyan theyreached the junction of the branch line which descends towardssouth-eastern India by Kandallah and Pounah; and, passing Pauwell, theyentered the defiles of the mountains, with their basalt bases, andtheir summits crowned with thick and verdant forests. Phileas Fogg andSir Francis Cromarty exchanged a few words from time to time, and nowSir Francis, reviving the conversation, observed, “Some years ago, Mr.Fogg, you would have met with a delay at this point which wouldprobably have lost you your wager.”“How so, Sir Francis?”“Because the railway stopped at the base of these mountains, which thepassengers were obliged to cross in palanquins or on ponies toKandallah, on the other side.”“Such a delay would not have deranged my plans in the least,” said Mr.Fogg. “I have constantly foreseen the likelihood of certain obstacles.”“But, Mr. Fogg,” pursued Sir Francis, “you run the risk of having somedifficulty about this worthy fellow’s adventure at the pagoda.”Passepartout, his feet comfortably wrapped in his travelling-blanket,was sound asleep and did not dream that anybody was talking about him.“The Government is very severe upon that kind of offence. It takesparticular care that the religious customs of the Indians should berespected, and if your servant were caught—”“Very well, Sir Francis,” replied Mr. Fogg; “if he had been caught hewould have been condemned and punished, and then would have quietlyreturned to Europe. I don’t see how this affair could have delayed hismaster.”The conversation fell again. During the night the train left themountains behind, and passed Nassik, and the next day proceeded overthe flat, well-cultivated country of the Khandeish, with its stragglingvillages, above which rose the minarets of the pagodas. This fertileterritory is watered by numerous small rivers and limpid streams,mostly tributaries of the Godavery.Passepartout, on waking and looking out, could not realise that he wasactually crossing India in a railway train. The locomotive, guided byan English engineer and fed with English coal, threw out its smoke uponcotton, coffee, nutmeg, clove, and pepper plantations, while the steamcurled in spirals around groups of palm-trees, in the midst of whichwere seen picturesque bungalows, viharis (sort of abandonedmonasteries), and marvellous temples enriched by the exhaustlessornamentation of Indian architecture. Then they came upon vast tractsextending to the horizon, with jungles inhabited by snakes and tigers,which fled at the noise of the train; succeeded by forests penetratedby the railway, and still haunted by elephants which, with pensiveeyes, gazed at the train as it passed. The travellers crossed, beyondMilligaum, the fatal country so often stained with blood by thesectaries of the goddess Kali. Not far off rose Ellora, with itsgraceful pagodas, and the famous Aurungabad, capital of the ferociousAureng-Zeb, now the chief town of one of the detached provinces of thekingdom of the Nizam. It was thereabouts that Feringhea, the Thuggeechief, king of the stranglers, held his sway. These ruffians, united bya secret bond, strangled victims of every age in honour of the goddessDeath, without ever shedding blood; there was a period when this partof the country could scarcely be travelled over without corpses beingfound in every direction. The English Government has succeeded ingreatly diminishing these murders, though the Thuggees still exist, andpursue the exercise of their horrible rites.At half-past twelve the train stopped at Burhampoor where Passepartoutwas able to purchase some Indian slippers, ornamented with falsepearls, in which, with evident vanity, he proceeded to encase his feet.The travellers made a hasty breakfast and started off for Assurghur,after skirting for a little the banks of the small river Tapty, whichempties into the Gulf of Cambray, near Surat.Passepartout was now plunged into absorbing reverie. Up to his arrivalat Bombay, he had entertained hopes that their journey would end there;but, now that they were plainly whirling across India at full speed, asudden change had come over the spirit of his dreams. His old vagabondnature returned to him; the fantastic ideas of his youth once more tookpossession of him. He came to regard his master’s project as intendedin good earnest, believed in the reality of the bet, and therefore inthe tour of the world and the necessity of making it without failwithin the designated period. Already he began to worry about possibledelays, and accidents which might happen on the way. He recognisedhimself as being personally interested in the wager, and trembled atthe thought that he might have been the means of losing it by hisunpardonable folly of the night before. Being much less cool-headedthan Mr. Fogg, he was much more restless, counting and recounting thedays passed over, uttering maledictions when the train stopped, andaccusing it of sluggishness, and mentally blaming Mr. Fogg for nothaving bribed the engineer. The worthy fellow was ignorant that, whileit was possible by such means to hasten the rate of a steamer, it couldnot be done on the railway.The train entered the defiles of the Sutpour Mountains, which separatethe Khandeish from Bundelcund, towards evening. The next day SirFrancis Cromarty asked Passepartout what time it was; to which, onconsulting his watch, he replied that it was three in the morning. Thisfamous timepiece, always regulated on the Greenwich meridian, which wasnow some seventy-seven degrees westward, was at least four hours slow.Sir Francis corrected Passepartout’s time, whereupon the latter madethe same remark that he had done to Fix; and upon the general insistingthat the watch should be regulated in each new meridian, since he wasconstantly going eastward, that is in the face of the sun, andtherefore the days were shorter by four minutes for each degree goneover, Passepartout obstinately refused to alter his watch, which hekept at London time. It was an innocent delusion which could harm noone.The train stopped, at eight o’clock, in the midst of a glade somefifteen miles beyond Rothal, where there were several bungalows, andworkmen’s cabins. The conductor, passing along the carriages, shouted,“Passengers will get out here!”Phileas Fogg looked at Sir Francis Cromarty for an explanation; but thegeneral could not tell what meant a halt in the midst of this forest ofdates and acacias.Passepartout, not less surprised, rushed out and speedily returned,crying: “Monsieur, no more railway!”“What do you mean?” asked Sir Francis.“I mean to say that the train isn’t going on.”The general at once stepped out, while Phileas Fogg calmly followedhim, and they proceeded together to the conductor.“Where are we?” asked Sir Francis.“At the hamlet of Kholby.”“Do we stop here?”“Certainly. The railway isn’t finished.”“What! not finished?”“No. There’s still a matter of fifty miles to be laid from here toAllahabad, where the line begins again.”“But the papers announced the opening of the railway throughout.”“What would you have, officer? The papers were mistaken.”“Yet you sell tickets from Bombay to Calcutta,” retorted Sir Francis,who was growing warm.“No doubt,” replied the conductor; “but the passengers know that theymust provide means of transportation for themselves from Kholby toAllahabad.”Sir Francis was furious. Passepartout would willingly have knocked theconductor down, and did not dare to look at his master.“Sir Francis,” said Mr. Fogg quietly, “we will, if you please, lookabout for some means of conveyance to Allahabad.”“Mr. Fogg, this is a delay greatly to your disadvantage.”“No, Sir Francis; it was foreseen.”“What! You knew that the way—”“Not at all; but I knew that some obstacle or other would sooner orlater arise on my route. Nothing, therefore, is lost. I have two days,which I have already gained, to sacrifice. A steamer leaves Calcuttafor Hong Kong at noon, on the 25th. This is the 22nd, and we shallreach Calcutta in time.”There was nothing to say to so confident a response.It was but too true that the railway came to a termination at thispoint. The papers were like some watches, which have a way of gettingtoo fast, and had been premature in their announcement of thecompletion of the line. The greater part of the travellers were awareof this interruption, and, leaving the train, they began to engage suchvehicles as the village could provide four-wheeled palkigharis, waggonsdrawn by zebus, carriages that looked like perambulating pagodas,palanquins, ponies, and what not.Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis Cromarty, after searching the village from endto end, came back without having found anything.“I shall go afoot,” said Phileas Fogg.Passepartout, who had now rejoined his master, made a wry grimace, ashe thought of his magnificent, but too frail Indian shoes. Happily hetoo had been looking about him, and, after a moment’s hesitation, said,“Monsieur, I think I have found a means of conveyance.”“What?”“An elephant! An elephant that belongs to an Indian who lives but ahundred steps from here.”“Let’s go and see the elephant,” replied Mr. Fogg.They soon reached a small hut, near which, enclosed within some highpalings, was the animal in question. An Indian came out of the hut,and, at their request, conducted them within the enclosure. Theelephant, which its owner had reared, not for a beast of burden, butfor warlike purposes, was half domesticated. The Indian had begunalready, by often irritating him, and feeding him every three months onsugar and butter, to impart to him a ferocity not in his nature, thismethod being often employed by those who train the Indian elephants forbattle. Happily, however, for Mr. Fogg, the animal’s instruction inthis direction had not gone far, and the elephant still preserved hisnatural gentleness. Kiouni—this was the name of the beast—coulddoubtless travel rapidly for a long time, and, in default of any othermeans of conveyance, Mr. Fogg resolved to hire him. But elephants arefar from cheap in India, where they are becoming scarce, the males,which alone are suitable for circus shows, are much sought, especiallyas but few of them are domesticated. When therefore Mr. Fogg proposedto the Indian to hire Kiouni, he refused point-blank. Mr. Foggpersisted, offering the excessive sum of ten pounds an hour for theloan of the beast to Allahabad. Refused. Twenty pounds? Refused also.Forty pounds? Still refused. Passepartout jumped at each advance; butthe Indian declined to be tempted. Yet the offer was an alluring one,for, supposing it took the elephant fifteen hours to reach Allahabad,his owner would receive no less than six hundred pounds sterling.Phileas Fogg, without getting in the least flurried, then proposed topurchase the animal outright, and at first offered a thousand poundsfor him. The Indian, perhaps thinking he was going to make a greatbargain, still refused.Sir Francis Cromarty took Mr. Fogg aside, and begged him to reflectbefore he went any further; to which that gentleman replied that he wasnot in the habit of acting rashly, that a bet of twenty thousand poundswas at stake, that the elephant was absolutely necessary to him, andthat he would secure him if he had to pay twenty times his value.Returning to the Indian, whose small, sharp eyes, glistening withavarice, betrayed that with him it was only a question of how great aprice he could obtain. Mr. Fogg offered first twelve hundred, thenfifteen hundred, eighteen hundred, two thousand pounds. Passepartout,usually so rubicund, was fairly white with suspense.At two thousand pounds the Indian yielded.“What a price, good heavens!” cried Passepartout, “for an elephant.”It only remained now to find a guide, which was comparatively easy. Ayoung Parsee, with an intelligent face, offered his services, which Mr.Fogg accepted, promising so generous a reward as to materiallystimulate his zeal. The elephant was led out and equipped. The Parsee,who was an accomplished elephant driver, covered his back with a sortof saddle-cloth, and attached to each of his flanks some curiouslyuncomfortable howdahs. Phileas Fogg paid the Indian with some banknoteswhich he extracted from the famous carpet-bag, a proceeding that seemedto deprive poor Passepartout of his vitals. Then he offered to carrySir Francis to Allahabad, which the brigadier gratefully accepted, asone traveller the more would not be likely to fatigue the giganticbeast. Provisions were purchased at Kholby, and, while Sir Francis andMr. Fogg took the howdahs on either side, Passepartout got astride thesaddle-cloth between them. The Parsee perched himself on the elephant’sneck, and at nine o’clock they set out from the village, the animalmarching off through the dense forest of palms by the shortest cut.CHAPTER XII.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND HIS COMPANIONS VENTURE ACROSS THE INDIANFORESTS, AND WHAT ENSUEDIn order to shorten the journey, the guide passed to the left of theline where the railway was still in process of being built. This line,owing to the capricious turnings of the Vindhia Mountains, did notpursue a straight course. The Parsee, who was quite familiar with theroads and paths in the district, declared that they would gain twentymiles by striking directly through the forest.Phileas Fogg and Sir Francis Cromarty, plunged to the neck in thepeculiar howdahs provided for them, were horribly jostled by the swifttrotting of the elephant, spurred on as he was by the skilful Parsee;but they endured the discomfort with true British phlegm, talkinglittle, and scarcely able to catch a glimpse of each other. As forPassepartout, who was mounted on the beast’s back, and received thedirect force of each concussion as he trod along, he was very careful,in accordance with his master’s advice, to keep his tongue from betweenhis teeth, as it would otherwise have been bitten off short. The worthyfellow bounced from the elephant’s neck to his rump, and vaulted like aclown on a spring-board; yet he laughed in the midst of his bouncing,and from time to time took a piece of sugar out of his pocket, andinserted it in Kiouni’s trunk, who received it without in the leastslackening his regular trot.After two hours the guide stopped the elephant, and gave him an hourfor rest, during which Kiouni, after quenching his thirst at aneighbouring spring, set to devouring the branches and shrubs roundabout him. Neither Sir Francis nor Mr. Fogg regretted the delay, andboth descended with a feeling of relief. “Why, he’s made of iron!”exclaimed the general, gazing admiringly on Kiouni.“Of forged iron,” replied Passepartout, as he set about preparing ahasty breakfast.At noon the Parsee gave the signal of departure. The country soonpresented a very savage aspect. Copses of dates and dwarf-palmssucceeded the dense forests; then vast, dry plains, dotted with scantyshrubs, and sown with great blocks of syenite. All this portion ofBundelcund, which is little frequented by travellers, is inhabited by afanatical population, hardened in the most horrible practices of theHindoo faith. The English have not been able to secure completedominion over this territory, which is subjected to the influence ofrajahs, whom it is almost impossible to reach in their inaccessiblemountain fastnesses. The travellers several times saw bands offerocious Indians, who, when they perceived the elephant stridingacross-country, made angry and threatening motions. The Parsee avoidedthem as much as possible. Few animals were observed on the route; eventhe monkeys hurried from their path with contortions and grimaces whichconvulsed Passepartout with laughter.In the midst of his gaiety, however, one thought troubled the worthyservant. What would Mr. Fogg do with the elephant when he got toAllahabad? Would he carry him on with him? Impossible! The cost oftransporting him would make him ruinously expensive. Would he sell him,or set him free? The estimable beast certainly deserved someconsideration. Should Mr. Fogg choose to make him, Passepartout, apresent of Kiouni, he would be very much embarrassed; and thesethoughts did not cease worrying him for a long time.The principal chain of the Vindhias was crossed by eight in theevening, and another halt was made on the northern slope, in a ruinedbungalow. They had gone nearly twenty-five miles that day, and an equaldistance still separated them from the station of Allahabad.The night was cold. The Parsee lit a fire in the bungalow with a fewdry branches, and the warmth was very grateful, provisions purchased atKholby sufficed for supper, and the travellers ate ravenously. Theconversation, beginning with a few disconnected phrases, soon gaveplace to loud and steady snores. The guide watched Kiouni, who sleptstanding, bolstering himself against the trunk of a large tree. Nothingoccurred during the night to disturb the slumberers, althoughoccasional growls from panthers and chatterings of monkeys broke thesilence; the more formidable beasts made no cries or hostiledemonstration against the occupants of the bungalow. Sir Francis sleptheavily, like an honest soldier overcome with fatigue. Passepartout waswrapped in uneasy dreams of the bouncing of the day before. As for Mr.Fogg, he slumbered as peacefully as if he had been in his serenemansion in Saville Row.The journey was resumed at six in the morning; the guide hoped to reachAllahabad by evening. In that case, Mr. Fogg would only lose a part ofthe forty-eight hours saved since the beginning of the tour. Kiouni,resuming his rapid gait, soon descended the lower spurs of theVindhias, and towards noon they passed by the village of Kallenger, onthe Cani, one of the branches of the Ganges. The guide avoidedinhabited places, thinking it safer to keep the open country, whichlies along the first depressions of the basin of the great river.Allahabad was now only twelve miles to the north-east. They stoppedunder a clump of bananas, the fruit of which, as healthy as bread andas succulent as cream, was amply partaken of and appreciated.At two o’clock the guide entered a thick forest which extended severalmiles; he preferred to travel under cover of the woods. They had not asyet had any unpleasant encounters, and the journey seemed on the pointof being successfully accomplished, when the elephant, becomingrestless, suddenly stopped.It was then four o’clock.“What’s the matter?” asked Sir Francis, putting out his head.“I don’t know, officer,” replied the Parsee, listening attentively to aconfused murmur which came through the thick branches.The murmur soon became more distinct; it now seemed like a distantconcert of human voices accompanied by brass instruments. Passepartoutwas all eyes and ears. Mr. Fogg patiently waited without a word. TheParsee jumped to the ground, fastened the elephant to a tree, andplunged into the thicket. He soon returned, saying:“A procession of Brahmins is coming this way. We must prevent theirseeing us, if possible.”The guide unloosed the elephant and led him into a thicket, at the sametime asking the travellers not to stir. He held himself ready tobestride the animal at a moment’s notice, should flight becomenecessary; but he evidently thought that the procession of the faithfulwould pass without perceiving them amid the thick foliage, in whichthey were wholly concealed.The discordant tones of the voices and instruments drew nearer, and nowdroning songs mingled with the sound of the tambourines and cymbals.The head of the procession soon appeared beneath the trees, a hundredpaces away; and the strange figures who performed the religiousceremony were easily distinguished through the branches. First came thepriests, with mitres on their heads, and clothed in long lace robes.They were surrounded by men, women, and children, who sang a kind oflugubrious psalm, interrupted at regular intervals by the tambourinesand cymbals; while behind them was drawn a car with large wheels, thespokes of which represented serpents entwined with each other. Upon thecar, which was drawn by four richly caparisoned zebus, stood a hideousstatue with four arms, the body coloured a dull red, with haggard eyes,dishevelled hair, protruding tongue, and lips tinted with betel. Itstood upright upon the figure of a prostrate and headless giant.Sir Francis, recognising the statue, whispered, “The goddess Kali; thegoddess of love and death.”“Of death, perhaps,” muttered back Passepartout, “but of love—that uglyold hag? Never!”The Parsee made a motion to keep silence.A group of old fakirs were capering and making a wild ado round thestatue; these were striped with ochre, and covered with cuts whencetheir blood issued drop by drop—stupid fanatics, who, in the greatIndian ceremonies, still throw themselves under the wheels ofJuggernaut. Some Brahmins, clad in all the sumptuousness of Orientalapparel, and leading a woman who faltered at every step, followed. Thiswoman was young, and as fair as a European. Her head and neck,shoulders, ears, arms, hands, and toes were loaded down with jewels andgems with bracelets, earrings, and rings; while a tunic bordered withgold, and covered with a light muslin robe, betrayed the outline of herform.The guards who followed the young woman presented a violent contrast toher, armed as they were with naked sabres hung at their waists, andlong damascened pistols, and bearing a corpse on a palanquin. It wasthe body of an old man, gorgeously arrayed in the habiliments of arajah, wearing, as in life, a turban embroidered with pearls, a robe oftissue of silk and gold, a scarf of cashmere sewed with diamonds, andthe magnificent weapons of a Hindoo prince. Next came the musicians anda rearguard of capering fakirs, whose cries sometimes drowned the noiseof the instruments; these closed the procession.Sir Francis watched the procession with a sad countenance, and, turningto the guide, said, “A suttee.”The Parsee nodded, and put his finger to his lips. The processionslowly wound under the trees, and soon its last ranks disappeared inthe depths of the wood. The songs gradually died away; occasionallycries were heard in the distance, until at last all was silence again.Phileas Fogg had heard what Sir Francis said, and, as soon as theprocession had disappeared, asked: “What is a suttee?”“A suttee,” returned the general, “is a human sacrifice, but avoluntary one. The woman you have just seen will be burned to-morrow atthe dawn of day.”“Oh, the scoundrels!” cried Passepartout, who could not repress hisindignation.“And the corpse?” asked Mr. Fogg.“Is that of the prince, her husband,” said the guide; “an independentrajah of Bundelcund.”“Is it possible,” resumed Phileas Fogg, his voice betraying not theleast emotion, “that these barbarous customs still exist in India, andthat the English have been unable to put a stop to them?”“These sacrifices do not occur in the larger portion of India,” repliedSir Francis; “but we have no power over these savage territories, andespecially here in Bundelcund. The whole district north of the Vindhiasis the theatre of incessant murders and pillage.”“The poor wretch!” exclaimed Passepartout, “to be burned alive!”“Yes,” returned Sir Francis, “burned alive. And, if she were not, youcannot conceive what treatment she would be obliged to submit to fromher relatives. They would shave off her hair, feed her on a scantyallowance of rice, treat her with contempt; she would be looked upon asan unclean creature, and would die in some corner, like a scurvy dog.The prospect of so frightful an existence drives these poor creaturesto the sacrifice much more than love or religious fanaticism.Sometimes, however, the sacrifice is really voluntary, and it requiresthe active interference of the Government to prevent it. Several yearsago, when I was living at Bombay, a young widow asked permission of thegovernor to be burned along with her husband’s body; but, as you mayimagine, he refused. The woman left the town, took refuge with anindependent rajah, and there carried out her self-devoted purpose.”While Sir Francis was speaking, the guide shook his head several times,and now said: “The sacrifice which will take place to-morrow at dawn isnot a voluntary one.”“How do you know?”“Everybody knows about this affair in Bundelcund.”“But the wretched creature did not seem to be making any resistance,”observed Sir Francis.“That was because they had intoxicated her with fumes of hemp andopium.”“But where are they taking her?”“To the pagoda of Pillaji, two miles from here; she will pass the nightthere.”“And the sacrifice will take place—”“To-morrow, at the first light of dawn.”The guide now led the elephant out of the thicket, and leaped upon hisneck. Just at the moment that he was about to urge Kiouni forward witha peculiar whistle, Mr. Fogg stopped him, and, turning to Sir FrancisCromarty, said, “Suppose we save this woman.”“Save the woman, Mr. Fogg!”“I have yet twelve hours to spare; I can devote them to that.”“Why, you are a man of heart!”“Sometimes,” replied Phileas Fogg, quietly; “when I have the time.”CHAPTER XIII.IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT RECEIVES A NEW PROOF THAT FORTUNE FAVORS THEBRAVEThe project was a bold one, full of difficulty, perhaps impracticable.Mr. Fogg was going to risk life, or at least liberty, and therefore thesuccess of his tour. But he did not hesitate, and he found in SirFrancis Cromarty an enthusiastic ally.As for Passepartout, he was ready for anything that might be proposed.His master’s idea charmed him; he perceived a heart, a soul, under thaticy exterior. He began to love Phileas Fogg.There remained the guide: what course would he adopt? Would he not takepart with the Indians? In default of his assistance, it was necessaryto be assured of his neutrality.Sir Francis frankly put the question to him.“Officers,” replied the guide, “I am a Parsee, and this woman is aParsee. Command me as you will.”“Excellent!” said Mr. Fogg.“However,” resumed the guide, “it is certain, not only that we shallrisk our lives, but horrible tortures, if we are taken.”“That is foreseen,” replied Mr. Fogg. “I think we must wait till nightbefore acting.”“I think so,” said the guide.The worthy Indian then gave some account of the victim, who, he said,was a celebrated beauty of the Parsee race, and the daughter of awealthy Bombay merchant. She had received a thoroughly Englisheducation in that city, and, from her manners and intelligence, wouldbe thought an European. Her name was Aouda. Left an orphan, she wasmarried against her will to the old rajah of Bundelcund; and, knowingthe fate that awaited her, she escaped, was retaken, and devoted by therajah’s relatives, who had an interest in her death, to the sacrificefrom which it seemed she could not escape.The Parsee’s narrative only confirmed Mr. Fogg and his companions intheir generous design. It was decided that the guide should direct theelephant towards the pagoda of Pillaji, which he accordingly approachedas quickly as possible. They halted, half an hour afterwards, in acopse, some five hundred feet from the pagoda, where they were wellconcealed; but they could hear the groans and cries of the fakirsdistinctly.They then discussed the means of getting at the victim. The guide wasfamiliar with the pagoda of Pillaji, in which, as he declared, theyoung woman was imprisoned. Could they enter any of its doors while thewhole party of Indians was plunged in a drunken sleep, or was it saferto attempt to make a hole in the walls? This could only be determinedat the moment and the place themselves; but it was certain that theabduction must be made that night, and not when, at break of day, thevictim was led to her funeral pyre. Then no human intervention couldsave her.As soon as night fell, about six o’clock, they decided to make areconnaissance around the pagoda. The cries of the fakirs were justceasing; the Indians were in the act of plunging themselves into thedrunkenness caused by liquid opium mingled with hemp, and it might bepossible to slip between them to the temple itself.The Parsee, leading the others, noiselessly crept through the wood, andin ten minutes they found themselves on the banks of a small stream,whence, by the light of the rosin torches, they perceived a pyre ofwood, on the top of which lay the embalmed body of the rajah, which wasto be burned with his wife. The pagoda, whose minarets loomed above thetrees in the deepening dusk, stood a hundred steps away.“Come!” whispered the guide.He slipped more cautiously than ever through the brush, followed by hiscompanions; the silence around was only broken by the low murmuring ofthe wind among the branches.Soon the Parsee stopped on the borders of the glade, which was lit upby the torches. The ground was covered by groups of the Indians,motionless in their drunken sleep; it seemed a battlefield strewn withthe dead. Men, women, and children lay together.In the background, among the trees, the pagoda of Pillaji loomeddistinctly. Much to the guide’s disappointment, the guards of therajah, lighted by torches, were watching at the doors and marching toand fro with naked sabres; probably the priests, too, were watchingwithin.The Parsee, now convinced that it was impossible to force an entranceto the temple, advanced no farther, but led his companions back again.Phileas Fogg and Sir Francis Cromarty also saw that nothing could beattempted in that direction. They stopped, and engaged in a whisperedcolloquy.“It is only eight now,” said the brigadier, “and these guards may alsogo to sleep.”“It is not impossible,” returned the Parsee.They lay down at the foot of a tree, and waited.The time seemed long; the guide ever and anon left them to take anobservation on the edge of the wood, but the guards watched steadily bythe glare of the torches, and a dim light crept through the windows ofthe pagoda.They waited till midnight; but no change took place among the guards,and it became apparent that their yielding to sleep could not becounted on. The other plan must be carried out; an opening in the wallsof the pagoda must be made. It remained to ascertain whether thepriests were watching by the side of their victim as assiduously aswere the soldiers at the door.After a last consultation, the guide announced that he was ready forthe attempt, and advanced, followed by the others. They took aroundabout way, so as to get at the pagoda on the rear. They reachedthe walls about half-past twelve, without having met anyone; here therewas no guard, nor were there either windows or doors.The night was dark. The moon, on the wane, scarcely left the horizon,and was covered with heavy clouds; the height of the trees deepened thedarkness.It was not enough to reach the walls; an opening in them must beaccomplished, and to attain this purpose the party only had theirpocket-knives. Happily the temple walls were built of brick and wood,which could be penetrated with little difficulty; after one brick hadbeen taken out, the rest would yield easily.They set noiselessly to work, and the Parsee on one side andPassepartout on the other began to loosen the bricks so as to make anaperture two feet wide. They were getting on rapidly, when suddenly acry was heard in the interior of the temple, followed almost instantlyby other cries replying from the outside. Passepartout and the guidestopped. Had they been heard? Was the alarm being given? Commonprudence urged them to retire, and they did so, followed by PhileasFogg and Sir Francis. They again hid themselves in the wood, and waitedtill the disturbance, whatever it might be, ceased, holding themselvesready to resume their attempt without delay. But, awkwardly enough, theguards now appeared at the rear of the temple, and there installedthemselves, in readiness to prevent a surprise.It would be difficult to describe the disappointment of the party, thusinterrupted in their work. They could not now reach the victim; how,then, could they save her? Sir Francis shook his fists, Passepartoutwas beside himself, and the guide gnashed his teeth with rage. Thetranquil Fogg waited, without betraying any emotion.“We have nothing to do but to go away,” whispered Sir Francis.“Nothing but to go away,” echoed the guide.“Stop,” said Fogg. “I am only due at Allahabad tomorrow before noon.”“But what can you hope to do?” asked Sir Francis. “In a few hours itwill be daylight, and—”“The chance which now seems lost may present itself at the lastmoment.”Sir Francis would have liked to read Phileas Fogg’s eyes. What was thiscool Englishman thinking of? Was he planning to make a rush for theyoung woman at the very moment of the sacrifice, and boldly snatch herfrom her executioners?This would be utter folly, and it was hard to admit that Fogg was sucha fool. Sir Francis consented, however, to remain to the end of thisterrible drama. The guide led them to the rear of the glade, where theywere able to observe the sleeping groups.Meanwhile Passepartout, who had perched himself on the lower branchesof a tree, was resolving an idea which had at first struck him like aflash, and which was now firmly lodged in his brain.He had commenced by saying to himself, “What folly!” and then herepeated, “Why not, after all? It’s a chance,—perhaps the only one; andwith such sots!” Thinking thus, he slipped, with the suppleness of aserpent, to the lowest branches, the ends of which bent almost to theground.The hours passed, and the lighter shades now announced the approach ofday, though it was not yet light. This was the moment. The slumberingmultitude became animated, the tambourines sounded, songs and criesarose; the hour of the sacrifice had come. The doors of the pagodaswung open, and a bright light escaped from its interior, in the midstof which Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis espied the victim. She seemed, havingshaken off the stupor of intoxication, to be striving to escape fromher executioner. Sir Francis’s heart throbbed; and, convulsivelyseizing Mr. Fogg’s hand, found in it an open knife. Just at this momentthe crowd began to move. The young woman had again fallen into a stuporcaused by the fumes of hemp, and passed among the fakirs, who escortedher with their wild, religious cries.Phileas Fogg and his companions, mingling in the rear ranks of thecrowd, followed; and in two minutes they reached the banks of thestream, and stopped fifty paces from the pyre, upon which still lay therajah’s corpse. In the semi-obscurity they saw the victim, quitesenseless, stretched out beside her husband’s body. Then a torch wasbrought, and the wood, heavily soaked with oil, instantly took fire.At this moment Sir Francis and the guide seized Phileas Fogg, who, inan instant of mad generosity, was about to rush upon the pyre. But hehad quickly pushed them aside, when the whole scene suddenly changed. Acry of terror arose. The whole multitude prostrated themselves,terror-stricken, on the ground.The old rajah was not dead, then, since he rose of a sudden, like aspectre, took up his wife in his arms, and descended from the pyre inthe midst of the clouds of smoke, which only heightened his ghostlyappearance.Fakirs and soldiers and priests, seized with instant terror, lay there,with their faces on the ground, not daring to lift their eyes andbehold such a prodigy.The inanimate victim was borne along by the vigorous arms whichsupported her, and which she did not seem in the least to burden. Mr.Fogg and Sir Francis stood erect, the Parsee bowed his head, andPassepartout was, no doubt, scarcely less stupefied.The resuscitated rajah approached Sir Francis and Mr. Fogg, and, in anabrupt tone, said, “Let us be off!”It was Passepartout himself, who had slipped upon the pyre in the midstof the smoke and, profiting by the still overhanging darkness, haddelivered the young woman from death! It was Passepartout who, playinghis part with a happy audacity, had passed through the crowd amid thegeneral terror.A moment after all four of the party had disappeared in the woods, andthe elephant was bearing them away at a rapid pace. But the cries andnoise, and a ball which whizzed through Phileas Fogg’s hat, apprisedthem that the trick had been discovered.The old rajah’s body, indeed, now appeared upon the burning pyre; andthe priests, recovered from their terror, perceived that an abductionhad taken place. They hastened into the forest, followed by thesoldiers, who fired a volley after the fugitives; but the latterrapidly increased the distance between them, and ere long foundthemselves beyond the reach of the bullets and arrows.CHAPTER XIV.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG DESCENDS THE WHOLE LENGTH OF THE BEAUTIFUL VALLEYOF THE GANGES WITHOUT EVER THINKING OF SEEING ITThe rash exploit had been accomplished; and for an hour Passepartoutlaughed gaily at his success. Sir Francis pressed the worthy fellow’shand, and his master said, “Well done!” which, from him, was highcommendation; to which Passepartout replied that all the credit of theaffair belonged to Mr. Fogg. As for him, he had only been struck with a“queer” idea; and he laughed to think that for a few moments he,Passepartout, the ex-gymnast, ex-sergeant fireman, had been the spouseof a charming woman, a venerable, embalmed rajah! As for the youngIndian woman, she had been unconscious throughout of what was passing,and now, wrapped up in a travelling-blanket, was reposing in one of thehowdahs.The elephant, thanks to the skilful guidance of the Parsee, wasadvancing rapidly through the still darksome forest, and, an hour afterleaving the pagoda, had crossed a vast plain. They made a halt at seveno’clock, the young woman being still in a state of completeprostration. The guide made her drink a little brandy and water, butthe drowsiness which stupefied her could not yet be shaken off. SirFrancis, who was familiar with the effects of the intoxication producedby the fumes of hemp, reassured his companions on her account. But hewas more disturbed at the prospect of her future fate. He told PhileasFogg that, should Aouda remain in India, she would inevitably fallagain into the hands of her executioners. These fanatics were scatteredthroughout the county, and would, despite the English police, recovertheir victim at Madras, Bombay, or Calcutta. She would only be safe byquitting India for ever.Phileas Fogg replied that he would reflect upon the matter.The station at Allahabad was reached about ten o’clock, and, theinterrupted line of railway being resumed, would enable them to reachCalcutta in less than twenty-four hours. Phileas Fogg would thus beable to arrive in time to take the steamer which left Calcutta the nextday, October 25th, at noon, for Hong Kong.The young woman was placed in one of the waiting-rooms of the station,whilst Passepartout was charged with purchasing for her variousarticles of toilet, a dress, shawl, and some furs; for which his mastergave him unlimited credit. Passepartout started off forthwith, andfound himself in the streets of Allahabad, that is, the City of God,one of the most venerated in India, being built at the junction of thetwo sacred rivers, Ganges and Jumna, the waters of which attractpilgrims from every part of the peninsula. The Ganges, according to thelegends of the Ramayana, rises in heaven, whence, owing to Brahma’sagency, it descends to the earth.Passepartout made it a point, as he made his purchases, to take a goodlook at the city. It was formerly defended by a noble fort, which hassince become a state prison; its commerce has dwindled away, andPassepartout in vain looked about him for such a bazaar as he used tofrequent in Regent Street. At last he came upon an elderly, crusty Jew,who sold second-hand articles, and from whom he purchased a dress ofScotch stuff, a large mantle, and a fine otter-skin pelisse, for whichhe did not hesitate to pay seventy-five pounds. He then returnedtriumphantly to the station.The influence to which the priests of Pillaji had subjected Aouda begangradually to yield, and she became more herself, so that her fine eyesresumed all their soft Indian expression.When the poet-king, Ucaf Uddaul, celebrates the charms of the queen ofAhmehnagara, he speaks thus:“Her shining tresses, divided in two parts, encircle the harmoniouscontour of her white and delicate cheeks, brilliant in their glow andfreshness. Her ebony brows have the form and charm of the bow of Kama,the god of love, and beneath her long silken lashes the purestreflections and a celestial light swim, as in the sacred lakes ofHimalaya, in the black pupils of her great clear eyes. Her teeth, fine,equal, and white, glitter between her smiling lips like dewdrops in apassion-flower’s half-enveloped breast. Her delicately formed ears, hervermilion hands, her little feet, curved and tender as the lotus-bud,glitter with the brilliancy of the loveliest pearls of Ceylon, the mostdazzling diamonds of Golconda. Her narrow and supple waist, which ahand may clasp around, sets forth the outline of her rounded figure andthe beauty of her bosom, where youth in its flower displays the wealthof its treasures; and beneath the silken folds of her tunic she seemsto have been modelled in pure silver by the godlike hand ofVicvarcarma, the immortal sculptor.”It is enough to say, without applying this poetical rhapsody to Aouda,that she was a charming woman, in all the European acceptation of thephrase. She spoke English with great purity, and the guide had notexaggerated in saying that the young Parsee had been transformed by herbringing up.The train was about to start from Allahabad, and Mr. Fogg proceeded topay the guide the price agreed upon for his service, and not a farthingmore; which astonished Passepartout, who remembered all that his masterowed to the guide’s devotion. He had, indeed, risked his life in theadventure at Pillaji, and, if he should be caught afterwards by theIndians, he would with difficulty escape their vengeance. Kiouni, also,must be disposed of. What should be done with the elephant, which hadbeen so dearly purchased? Phileas Fogg had already determined thisquestion.“Parsee,” said he to the guide, “you have been serviceable and devoted.I have paid for your service, but not for your devotion. Would you liketo have this elephant? He is yours.”The guide’s eyes glistened.“Your honour is giving me a fortune!” cried he.“Take him, guide,” returned Mr. Fogg, “and I shall still be yourdebtor.”“Good!” exclaimed Passepartout. “Take him, friend. Kiouni is a braveand faithful beast.” And, going up to the elephant, he gave him severallumps of sugar, saying, “Here, Kiouni, here, here.”The elephant grunted out his satisfaction, and, clasping Passepartoutaround the waist with his trunk, lifted him as high as his head.Passepartout, not in the least alarmed, caressed the animal, whichreplaced him gently on the ground.Soon after, Phileas Fogg, Sir Francis Cromarty, and Passepartout,installed in a carriage with Aouda, who had the best seat, werewhirling at full speed towards Benares. It was a run of eighty miles,and was accomplished in two hours. During the journey, the young womanfully recovered her senses. What was her astonishment to find herselfin this carriage, on the railway, dressed in European habiliments, andwith travellers who were quite strangers to her! Her companions firstset about fully reviving her with a little liquor, and then Sir Francisnarrated to her what had passed, dwelling upon the courage with whichPhileas Fogg had not hesitated to risk his life to save her, andrecounting the happy sequel of the venture, the result ofPassepartout’s rash idea. Mr. Fogg said nothing; while Passepartout,abashed, kept repeating that “it wasn’t worth telling.”Aouda pathetically thanked her deliverers, rather with tears thanwords; her fine eyes interpreted her gratitude better than her lips.Then, as her thoughts strayed back to the scene of the sacrifice, andrecalled the dangers which still menaced her, she shuddered withterror.Phileas Fogg understood what was passing in Aouda’s mind, and offered,in order to reassure her, to escort her to Hong Kong, where she mightremain safely until the affair was hushed up—an offer which she eagerlyand gratefully accepted. She had, it seems, a Parsee relation, who wasone of the principal merchants of Hong Kong, which is wholly an Englishcity, though on an island on the Chinese coast.At half-past twelve the train stopped at Benares. The Brahmin legendsassert that this city is built on the site of the ancient Casi, which,like Mahomet’s tomb, was once suspended between heaven and earth;though the Benares of to-day, which the Orientalists call the Athens ofIndia, stands quite unpoetically on the solid earth, Passepartoutcaught glimpses of its brick houses and clay huts, giving an aspect ofdesolation to the place, as the train entered it.Benares was Sir Francis Cromarty’s destination, the troops he wasrejoining being encamped some miles northward of the city. He badeadieu to Phileas Fogg, wishing him all success, and expressing the hopethat he would come that way again in a less original but moreprofitable fashion. Mr. Fogg lightly pressed him by the hand. Theparting of Aouda, who did not forget what she owed to Sir Francis,betrayed more warmth; and, as for Passepartout, he received a heartyshake of the hand from the gallant general.The railway, on leaving Benares, passed for a while along the valley ofthe Ganges. Through the windows of their carriage the travellers hadglimpses of the diversified landscape of Behar, with its mountainsclothed in verdure, its fields of barley, wheat, and corn, its junglespeopled with green alligators, its neat villages, and its stillthickly-leaved forests. Elephants were bathing in the waters of thesacred river, and groups of Indians, despite the advanced season andchilly air, were performing solemnly their pious ablutions. These werefervent Brahmins, the bitterest foes of Buddhism, their deities beingVishnu, the solar god, Shiva, the divine impersonation of naturalforces, and Brahma, the supreme ruler of priests and legislators. Whatwould these divinities think of India, anglicised as it is to-day, withsteamers whistling and scudding along the Ganges, frightening the gullswhich float upon its surface, the turtles swarming along its banks, andthe faithful dwelling upon its borders?The panorama passed before their eyes like a flash, save when the steamconcealed it fitfully from the view; the travellers could scarcelydiscern the fort of Chupenie, twenty miles south-westward from Benares,the ancient stronghold of the rajahs of Behar; or Ghazipur and itsfamous rose-water factories; or the tomb of Lord Cornwallis, rising onthe left bank of the Ganges; the fortified town of Buxar, or Patna, alarge manufacturing and trading-place, where is held the principalopium market of India; or Monghir, a more than European town, for it isas English as Manchester or Birmingham, with its iron foundries,edgetool factories, and high chimneys puffing clouds of black smokeheavenward.Night came on; the train passed on at full speed, in the midst of theroaring of the tigers, bears, and wolves which fled before thelocomotive; and the marvels of Bengal, Golconda ruined Gour,Murshedabad, the ancient capital, Burdwan, Hugly, and the French townof Chandernagor, where Passepartout would have been proud to see hiscountry’s flag flying, were hidden from their view in the darkness.Calcutta was reached at seven in the morning, and the packet left forHong Kong at noon; so that Phileas Fogg had five hours before him.According to his journal, he was due at Calcutta on the 25th ofOctober, and that was the exact date of his actual arrival. He wastherefore neither behind-hand nor ahead of time. The two days gainedbetween London and Bombay had been lost, as has been seen, in thejourney across India. But it is not to be supposed that Phileas Foggregretted them.CHAPTER XV.IN WHICH THE BAG OF BANKNOTES DISGORGES SOME THOUSANDS OF POUNDS MOREThe train entered the station, and Passepartout jumping out first, wasfollowed by Mr. Fogg, who assisted his fair companion to descend.Phileas Fogg intended to proceed at once to the Hong Kong steamer, inorder to get Aouda comfortably settled for the voyage. He was unwillingto leave her while they were still on dangerous ground.Just as he was leaving the station a policeman came up to him, andsaid, “Mr. Phileas Fogg?”“I am he.”“Is this man your servant?” added the policeman, pointing toPassepartout.“Yes.”“Be so good, both of you, as to follow me.”Mr. Fogg betrayed no surprise whatever. The policeman was arepresentative of the law, and law is sacred to an Englishman.Passepartout tried to reason about the matter, but the policeman tappedhim with his stick, and Mr. Fogg made him a signal to obey.“May this young lady go with us?” asked he.“She may,” replied the policeman.Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Passepartout were conducted to a palkigahri, asort of four-wheeled carriage, drawn by two horses, in which they tooktheir places and were driven away. No one spoke during the twentyminutes which elapsed before they reached their destination. They firstpassed through the “black town,” with its narrow streets, itsmiserable, dirty huts, and squalid population; then through the“European town,” which presented a relief in its bright brick mansions,shaded by coconut-trees and bristling with masts, where, although itwas early morning, elegantly dressed horsemen and handsome equipageswere passing back and forth.The carriage stopped before a modest-looking house, which, however, didnot have the appearance of a private mansion. The policeman havingrequested his prisoners—for so, truly, they might be called—to descend,conducted them into a room with barred windows, and said: “You willappear before Judge Obadiah at half-past eight.”He then retired, and closed the door.“Why, we are prisoners!” exclaimed Passepartout, falling into a chair.Aouda, with an emotion she tried to conceal, said to Mr. Fogg: “Sir,you must leave me to my fate! It is on my account that you receive thistreatment, it is for having saved me!”Phileas Fogg contented himself with saying that it was impossible. Itwas quite unlikely that he should be arrested for preventing a suttee.The complainants would not dare present themselves with such a charge.There was some mistake. Moreover, he would not, in any event, abandonAouda, but would escort her to Hong Kong.“But the steamer leaves at noon!” observed Passepartout, nervously.“We shall be on board by noon,” replied his master, placidly.It was said so positively that Passepartout could not help muttering tohimself, “Parbleu that’s certain! Before noon we shall be on board.”But he was by no means reassured.At half-past eight the door opened, the policeman appeared, and,requesting them to follow him, led the way to an adjoining hall. It wasevidently a court-room, and a crowd of Europeans and natives alreadyoccupied the rear of the apartment.Mr. Fogg and his two companions took their places on a bench oppositethe desks of the magistrate and his clerk. Immediately after, JudgeObadiah, a fat, round man, followed by the clerk, entered. He proceededto take down a wig which was hanging on a nail, and put it hurriedly onhis head.“The first case,” said he. Then, putting his hand to his head, heexclaimed, “Heh! This is not my wig!”“No, your worship,” returned the clerk, “it is mine.”“My dear Mr. Oysterpuff, how can a judge give a wise sentence in aclerk’s wig?”The wigs were exchanged.Passepartout was getting nervous, for the hands on the face of the bigclock over the judge seemed to go around with terrible rapidity.“The first case,” repeated Judge Obadiah.“Phileas Fogg?” demanded Oysterpuff.“I am here,” replied Mr. Fogg.“Passepartout?”“Present,” responded Passepartout.“Good,” said the judge. “You have been looked for, prisoners, for twodays on the trains from Bombay.”“But of what are we accused?” asked Passepartout, impatiently.“You are about to be informed.”“I am an English subject, sir,” said Mr. Fogg, “and I have the right—”“Have you been ill-treated?”“Not at all.”“Very well; let the complainants come in.”A door was swung open by order of the judge, and three Indian priestsentered.“That’s it,” muttered Passepartout; “these are the rogues who weregoing to burn our young lady.”The priests took their places in front of the judge, and the clerkproceeded to read in a loud voice a complaint of sacrilege againstPhileas Fogg and his servant, who were accused of having violated aplace held consecrated by the Brahmin religion.“You hear the charge?” asked the judge.“Yes, sir,” replied Mr. Fogg, consulting his watch, “and I admit it.”“You admit it?”“I admit it, and I wish to hear these priests admit, in their turn,what they were going to do at the pagoda of Pillaji.”The priests looked at each other; they did not seem to understand whatwas said.“Yes,” cried Passepartout, warmly; “at the pagoda of Pillaji, wherethey were on the point of burning their victim.”The judge stared with astonishment, and the priests were stupefied.“What victim?” said Judge Obadiah. “Burn whom? In Bombay itself?”“Bombay?” cried Passepartout.“Certainly. We are not talking of the pagoda of Pillaji, but of thepagoda of Malabar Hill, at Bombay.”“And as a proof,” added the clerk, “here are the desecrator’s veryshoes, which he left behind him.”Whereupon he placed a pair of shoes on his desk.“My shoes!” cried Passepartout, in his surprise permitting thisimprudent exclamation to escape him.The confusion of master and man, who had quite forgotten the affair atBombay, for which they were now detained at Calcutta, may be imagined.Fix the detective, had foreseen the advantage which Passepartout’sescapade gave him, and, delaying his departure for twelve hours, hadconsulted the priests of Malabar Hill. Knowing that the Englishauthorities dealt very severely with this kind of misdemeanour, hepromised them a goodly sum in damages, and sent them forward toCalcutta by the next train. Owing to the delay caused by the rescue ofthe young widow, Fix and the priests reached the Indian capital beforeMr. Fogg and his servant, the magistrates having been already warned bya dispatch to arrest them should they arrive. Fix’s disappointment whenhe learned that Phileas Fogg had not made his appearance in Calcuttamay be imagined. He made up his mind that the robber had stoppedsomewhere on the route and taken refuge in the southern provinces. Fortwenty-four hours Fix watched the station with feverish anxiety; atlast he was rewarded by seeing Mr. Fogg and Passepartout arrive,accompanied by a young woman, whose presence he was wholly at a loss toexplain. He hastened for a policeman; and this was how the party cameto be arrested and brought before Judge Obadiah.Had Passepartout been a little less preoccupied, he would have espiedthe detective ensconced in a corner of the court-room, watching theproceedings with an interest easily understood; for the warrant hadfailed to reach him at Calcutta, as it had done at Bombay and Suez.Judge Obadiah had unfortunately caught Passepartout’s rash exclamation,which the poor fellow would have given the world to recall.“The facts are admitted?” asked the judge.“Admitted,” replied Mr. Fogg, coldly.“Inasmuch,” resumed the judge, “as the English law protects equally andsternly the religions of the Indian people, and as the man Passepartouthas admitted that he violated the sacred pagoda of Malabar Hill, atBombay, on the 20th of October, I condemn the said Passepartout toimprisonment for fifteen days and a fine of three hundred pounds.”“Three hundred pounds!” cried Passepartout, startled at the largenessof the sum.“Silence!” shouted the constable.“And inasmuch,” continued the judge, “as it is not proved that the actwas not done by the connivance of the master with the servant, and asthe master in any case must be held responsible for the acts of hispaid servant, I condemn Phileas Fogg to a week’s imprisonment and afine of one hundred and fifty pounds.”Fix rubbed his hands softly with satisfaction; if Phileas Fogg could bedetained in Calcutta a week, it would be more than time for the warrantto arrive. Passepartout was stupefied. This sentence ruined his master.A wager of twenty thousand pounds lost, because he, like a preciousfool, had gone into that abominable pagoda!Phileas Fogg, as self-composed as if the judgment did not in the leastconcern him, did not even lift his eyebrows while it was beingpronounced. Just as the clerk was calling the next case, he rose, andsaid, “I offer bail.”“You have that right,” returned the judge.Fix’s blood ran cold, but he resumed his composure when he heard thejudge announce that the bail required for each prisoner would be onethousand pounds.“I will pay it at once,” said Mr. Fogg, taking a roll of bank-billsfrom the carpet-bag, which Passepartout had by him, and placing them onthe clerk’s desk.“This sum will be restored to you upon your release from prison,” saidthe judge. “Meanwhile, you are liberated on bail.”“Come!” said Phileas Fogg to his servant.“But let them at least give me back my shoes!” cried Passepartoutangrily.“Ah, these are pretty dear shoes!” he muttered, as they were handed tohim. “More than a thousand pounds apiece; besides, they pinch my feet.”Mr. Fogg, offering his arm to Aouda, then departed, followed by thecrestfallen Passepartout. Fix still nourished hopes that the robberwould not, after all, leave the two thousand pounds behind him, butwould decide to serve out his week in jail, and issued forth on Mr.Fogg’s traces. That gentleman took a carriage, and the party were soonlanded on one of the quays.The “Rangoon” was moored half a mile off in the harbour, its signal ofdeparture hoisted at the mast-head. Eleven o’clock was striking; Mr.Fogg was an hour in advance of time. Fix saw them leave the carriageand push off in a boat for the steamer, and stamped his feet withdisappointment.“The rascal is off, after all!” he exclaimed. “Two thousand poundssacrificed! He’s as prodigal as a thief! I’ll follow him to the end ofthe world if necessary; but, at the rate he is going on, the stolenmoney will soon be exhausted.”The detective was not far wrong in making this conjecture. Sinceleaving London, what with travelling expenses, bribes, the purchase ofthe elephant, bails, and fines, Mr. Fogg had already spent more thanfive thousand pounds on the way, and the percentage of the sumrecovered from the bank robber promised to the detectives, was rapidlydiminishing.CHAPTER XVI.IN WHICH FIX DOES NOT SEEM TO UNDERSTAND IN THE LEAST WHAT IS SAID TOHIMThe “Rangoon”—one of the Peninsular and Oriental Company’s boats plyingin the Chinese and Japanese seas—was a screw steamer, built of iron,weighing about seventeen hundred and seventy tons, and with engines offour hundred horse-power. She was as fast, but not as well fitted up,as the “Mongolia,” and Aouda was not as comfortably provided for onboard of her as Phileas Fogg could have wished. However, the trip fromCalcutta to Hong Kong only comprised some three thousand five hundredmiles, occupying from ten to twelve days, and the young woman was notdifficult to please.During the first days of the journey Aouda became better acquaintedwith her protector, and constantly gave evidence of her deep gratitudefor what he had done. The phlegmatic gentleman listened to her,apparently at least, with coldness, neither his voice nor his mannerbetraying the slightest emotion; but he seemed to be always on thewatch that nothing should be wanting to Aouda’s comfort. He visited herregularly each day at certain hours, not so much to talk himself, as tosit and hear her talk. He treated her with the strictest politeness,but with the precision of an automaton, the movements of which had beenarranged for this purpose. Aouda did not quite know what to make ofhim, though Passepartout had given her some hints of his master’seccentricity, and made her smile by telling her of the wager which wassending him round the world. After all, she owed Phileas Fogg her life,and she always regarded him through the exalting medium of hergratitude.Aouda confirmed the Parsee guide’s narrative of her touching history.She did, indeed, belong to the highest of the native races of India.Many of the Parsee merchants have made great fortunes there by dealingin cotton; and one of them, Sir Jametsee Jeejeebhoy, was made a baronetby the English government. Aouda was a relative of this great man, andit was his cousin, Jeejeeh, whom she hoped to join at Hong Kong.Whether she would find a protector in him she could not tell; but Mr.Fogg essayed to calm her anxieties, and to assure her that everythingwould be mathematically—he used the very word—arranged. Aouda fastenedher great eyes, “clear as the sacred lakes of the Himalaya,” upon him;but the intractable Fogg, as reserved as ever, did not seem at allinclined to throw himself into this lake.The first few days of the voyage passed prosperously, amid favourableweather and propitious winds, and they soon came in sight of the greatAndaman, the principal of the islands in the Bay of Bengal, with itspicturesque Saddle Peak, two thousand four hundred feet high, loomingabove the waters. The steamer passed along near the shores, but thesavage Papuans, who are in the lowest scale of humanity, but are not,as has been asserted, cannibals, did not make their appearance.The panorama of the islands, as they steamed by them, was superb. Vastforests of palms, arecs, bamboo, teakwood, of the gigantic mimosa, andtree-like ferns covered the foreground, while behind, the gracefuloutlines of the mountains were traced against the sky; and along thecoasts swarmed by thousands the precious swallows whose nests furnish aluxurious dish to the tables of the Celestial Empire. The variedlandscape afforded by the Andaman Islands was soon passed, however, andthe “Rangoon” rapidly approached the Straits of Malacca, which gaveaccess to the China seas.What was detective Fix, so unluckily drawn on from country to country,doing all this while? He had managed to embark on the “Rangoon” atCalcutta without being seen by Passepartout, after leaving orders that,if the warrant should arrive, it should be forwarded to him at HongKong; and he hoped to conceal his presence to the end of the voyage. Itwould have been difficult to explain why he was on board withoutawakening Passepartout’s suspicions, who thought him still at Bombay.But necessity impelled him, nevertheless, to renew his acquaintancewith the worthy servant, as will be seen.All the detective’s hopes and wishes were now centred on Hong Kong; forthe steamer’s stay at Singapore would be too brief to enable him totake any steps there. The arrest must be made at Hong Kong, or therobber would probably escape him for ever. Hong Kong was the lastEnglish ground on which he would set foot; beyond, China, Japan,America offered to Fogg an almost certain refuge. If the warrant shouldat last make its appearance at Hong Kong, Fix could arrest him and givehim into the hands of the local police, and there would be no furthertrouble. But beyond Hong Kong, a simple warrant would be of no avail;an extradition warrant would be necessary, and that would result indelays and obstacles, of which the rascal would take advantage to eludejustice.Fix thought over these probabilities during the long hours which hespent in his cabin, and kept repeating to himself, “Now, either thewarrant will be at Hong Kong, in which case I shall arrest my man, orit will not be there; and this time it is absolutely necessary that Ishould delay his departure. I have failed at Bombay, and I have failedat Calcutta; if I fail at Hong Kong, my reputation is lost: Cost whatit may, I _must_ succeed! But how shall I prevent his departure, ifthat should turn out to be my last resource?”Fix made up his mind that, if worst came to worst, he would make aconfidant of Passepartout, and tell him what kind of a fellow hismaster really was. That Passepartout was not Fogg’s accomplice, he wasvery certain. The servant, enlightened by his disclosure, and afraid ofbeing himself implicated in the crime, would doubtless become an allyof the detective. But this method was a dangerous one, only to beemployed when everything else had failed. A word from Passepartout tohis master would ruin all. The detective was therefore in a sorestrait. But suddenly a new idea struck him. The presence of Aouda onthe “Rangoon,” in company with Phileas Fogg, gave him new material forreflection.Who was this woman? What combination of events had made her Fogg’stravelling companion? They had evidently met somewhere between Bombayand Calcutta; but where? Had they met accidentally, or had Fogg goneinto the interior purposely in quest of this charming damsel? Fix wasfairly puzzled. He asked himself whether there had not been a wickedelopement; and this idea so impressed itself upon his mind that hedetermined to make use of the supposed intrigue. Whether the youngwoman were married or not, he would be able to create such difficultiesfor Mr. Fogg at Hong Kong that he could not escape by paying any amountof money.But could he even wait till they reached Hong Kong? Fogg had anabominable way of jumping from one boat to another, and, beforeanything could be effected, might get full under way again forYokohama.Fix decided that he must warn the English authorities, and signal the“Rangoon” before her arrival. This was easy to do, since the steamerstopped at Singapore, whence there is a telegraphic wire to Hong Kong.He finally resolved, moreover, before acting more positively, toquestion Passepartout. It would not be difficult to make him talk; and,as there was no time to lose, Fix prepared to make himself known.It was now the 30th of October, and on the following day the “Rangoon”was due at Singapore.Fix emerged from his cabin and went on deck. Passepartout waspromenading up and down in the forward part of the steamer. Thedetective rushed forward with every appearance of extreme surprise, andexclaimed, “You here, on the ‘Rangoon’?”“What, Monsieur Fix, are you on board?” returned the really astonishedPassepartout, recognising his crony of the “Mongolia.” “Why, I left youat Bombay, and here you are, on the way to Hong Kong! Are you goinground the world too?”“No, no,” replied Fix; “I shall stop at Hong Kong—at least for somedays.”“Hum!” said Passepartout, who seemed for an instant perplexed. “But howis it I have not seen you on board since we left Calcutta?”“Oh, a trifle of sea-sickness—I’ve been staying in my berth. The Gulfof Bengal does not agree with me as well as the Indian Ocean. And howis Mr. Fogg?”“As well and as punctual as ever, not a day behind time! But, MonsieurFix, you don’t know that we have a young lady with us.”“A young lady?” replied the detective, not seeming to comprehend whatwas said.Passepartout thereupon recounted Aouda’s history, the affair at theBombay pagoda, the purchase of the elephant for two thousand pounds,the rescue, the arrest, and sentence of the Calcutta court, and therestoration of Mr. Fogg and himself to liberty on bail. Fix, who wasfamiliar with the last events, seemed to be equally ignorant of allthat Passepartout related; and the later was charmed to find sointerested a listener.“But does your master propose to carry this young woman to Europe?”“Not at all. We are simply going to place her under the protection ofone of her relatives, a rich merchant at Hong Kong.”“Nothing to be done there,” said Fix to himself, concealing hisdisappointment. “A glass of gin, Mr. Passepartout?”“Willingly, Monsieur Fix. We must at least have a friendly glass onboard the ‘Rangoon.’”CHAPTER XVII.SHOWING WHAT HAPPENED ON THE VOYAGE FROM SINGAPORE TO HONG KONGThe detective and Passepartout met often on deck after this interview,though Fix was reserved, and did not attempt to induce his companion todivulge any more facts concerning Mr. Fogg. He caught a glimpse of thatmysterious gentleman once or twice; but Mr. Fogg usually confinedhimself to the cabin, where he kept Aouda company, or, according to hisinveterate habit, took a hand at whist.Passepartout began very seriously to conjecture what strange chancekept Fix still on the route that his master was pursuing. It was reallyworth considering why this certainly very amiable and complacentperson, whom he had first met at Suez, had then encountered on boardthe “Mongolia,” who disembarked at Bombay, which he announced as hisdestination, and now turned up so unexpectedly on the “Rangoon,” wasfollowing Mr. Fogg’s tracks step by step. What was Fix’s object?Passepartout was ready to wager his Indian shoes—which he religiouslypreserved—that Fix would also leave Hong Kong at the same time withthem, and probably on the same steamer.Passepartout might have cudgelled his brain for a century withouthitting upon the real object which the detective had in view. He nevercould have imagined that Phileas Fogg was being tracked as a robberaround the globe. But, as it is in human nature to attempt the solutionof every mystery, Passepartout suddenly discovered an explanation ofFix’s movements, which was in truth far from unreasonable. Fix, hethought, could only be an agent of Mr. Fogg’s friends at the ReformClub, sent to follow him up, and to ascertain that he really went roundthe world as had been agreed upon.“It’s clear!” repeated the worthy servant to himself, proud of hisshrewdness. “He’s a spy sent to keep us in view! That isn’t quite thething, either, to be spying Mr. Fogg, who is so honourable a man! Ah,gentlemen of the Reform, this shall cost you dear!”Passepartout, enchanted with his discovery, resolved to say nothing tohis master, lest he should be justly offended at this mistrust on thepart of his adversaries. But he determined to chaff Fix, when he hadthe chance, with mysterious allusions, which, however, need not betrayhis real suspicions.During the afternoon of Wednesday, 30th October, the “Rangoon” enteredthe Strait of Malacca, which separates the peninsula of that name fromSumatra. The mountainous and craggy islets intercepted the beauties ofthis noble island from the view of the travellers. The “Rangoon”weighed anchor at Singapore the next day at four a.m., to receive coal,having gained half a day on the prescribed time of her arrival. PhileasFogg noted this gain in his journal, and then, accompanied by Aouda,who betrayed a desire for a walk on shore, disembarked.Fix, who suspected Mr. Fogg’s every movement, followed them cautiously,without being himself perceived; while Passepartout, laughing in hissleeve at Fix’s manœuvres, went about his usual errands.The island of Singapore is not imposing in aspect, for there are nomountains; yet its appearance is not without attractions. It is a parkcheckered by pleasant highways and avenues. A handsome carriage, drawnby a sleek pair of New Holland horses, carried Phileas Fogg and Aoudainto the midst of rows of palms with brilliant foliage, and ofclove-trees, whereof the cloves form the heart of a half-open flower.Pepper plants replaced the prickly hedges of European fields;sago-bushes, large ferns with gorgeous branches, varied the aspect ofthis tropical clime; while nutmeg-trees in full foliage filled the airwith a penetrating perfume. Agile and grinning bands of monkeys skippedabout in the trees, nor were tigers wanting in the jungles.After a drive of two hours through the country, Aouda and Mr. Foggreturned to the town, which is a vast collection of heavy-looking,irregular houses, surrounded by charming gardens rich in tropicalfruits and plants; and at ten o’clock they re-embarked, closelyfollowed by the detective, who had kept them constantly in sight.Passepartout, who had been purchasing several dozen mangoes—a fruit aslarge as good-sized apples, of a dark-brown colour outside and a brightred within, and whose white pulp, melting in the mouth, affordsgourmands a delicious sensation—was waiting for them on deck. He wasonly too glad to offer some mangoes to Aouda, who thanked him verygracefully for them.At eleven o’clock the “Rangoon” rode out of Singapore harbour, and in afew hours the high mountains of Malacca, with their forests, inhabitedby the most beautifully-furred tigers in the world, were lost to view.Singapore is distant some thirteen hundred miles from the island ofHong Kong, which is a little English colony near the Chinese coast.Phileas Fogg hoped to accomplish the journey in six days, so as to bein time for the steamer which would leave on the 6th of November forYokohama, the principal Japanese port.The “Rangoon” had a large quota of passengers, many of whom disembarkedat Singapore, among them a number of Indians, Ceylonese, Chinamen,Malays, and Portuguese, mostly second-class travellers.The weather, which had hitherto been fine, changed with the lastquarter of the moon. The sea rolled heavily, and the wind at intervalsrose almost to a storm, but happily blew from the south-west, and thusaided the steamer’s progress. The captain as often as possible put uphis sails, and under the double action of steam and sail the vesselmade rapid progress along the coasts of Anam and Cochin China. Owing tothe defective construction of the “Rangoon,” however, unusualprecautions became necessary in unfavourable weather; but the loss oftime which resulted from this cause, while it nearly drove Passepartoutout of his senses, did not seem to affect his master in the least.Passepartout blamed the captain, the engineer, and the crew, andconsigned all who were connected with the ship to the land where thepepper grows. Perhaps the thought of the gas, which was remorselesslyburning at his expense in Saville Row, had something to do with his hotimpatience.“You are in a great hurry, then,” said Fix to him one day, “to reachHong Kong?”“A very great hurry!”“Mr. Fogg, I suppose, is anxious to catch the steamer for Yokohama?”“Terribly anxious.”“You believe in this journey around the world, then?”“Absolutely. Don’t you, Mr. Fix?”“I? I don’t believe a word of it.”“You’re a sly dog!” said Passepartout, winking at him.This expression rather disturbed Fix, without his knowing why. Had theFrenchman guessed his real purpose? He knew not what to think. But howcould Passepartout have discovered that he was a detective? Yet, inspeaking as he did, the man evidently meant more than he expressed.Passepartout went still further the next day; he could not hold histongue.“Mr. Fix,” said he, in a bantering tone, “shall we be so unfortunate asto lose you when we get to Hong Kong?”“Why,” responded Fix, a little embarrassed, “I don’t know; perhaps—”“Ah, if you would only go on with us! An agent of the PeninsularCompany, you know, can’t stop on the way! You were only going toBombay, and here you are in China. America is not far off, and fromAmerica to Europe is only a step.”Fix looked intently at his companion, whose countenance was as sereneas possible, and laughed with him. But Passepartout persisted inchaffing him by asking him if he made much by his present occupation.“Yes, and no,” returned Fix; “there is good and bad luck in suchthings. But you must understand that I don’t travel at my own expense.”“Oh, I am quite sure of that!” cried Passepartout, laughing heartily.Fix, fairly puzzled, descended to his cabin and gave himself up to hisreflections. He was evidently suspected; somehow or other the Frenchmanhad found out that he was a detective. But had he told his master? Whatpart was he playing in all this: was he an accomplice or not? Was thegame, then, up? Fix spent several hours turning these things over inhis mind, sometimes thinking that all was lost, then persuading himselfthat Fogg was ignorant of his presence, and then undecided what courseit was best to take.Nevertheless, he preserved his coolness of mind, and at last resolvedto deal plainly with Passepartout. If he did not find it practicable toarrest Fogg at Hong Kong, and if Fogg made preparations to leave thatlast foothold of English territory, he, Fix, would tell Passepartoutall. Either the servant was the accomplice of his master, and in thiscase the master knew of his operations, and he should fail; or else theservant knew nothing about the robbery, and then his interest would beto abandon the robber.Such was the situation between Fix and Passepartout. Meanwhile PhileasFogg moved about above them in the most majestic and unconsciousindifference. He was passing methodically in his orbit around theworld, regardless of the lesser stars which gravitated around him. Yetthere was near by what the astronomers would call a disturbing star,which might have produced an agitation in this gentleman’s heart. Butno! the charms of Aouda failed to act, to Passepartout’s greatsurprise; and the disturbances, if they existed, would have been moredifficult to calculate than those of Uranus which led to the discoveryof Neptune.It was every day an increasing wonder to Passepartout, who read inAouda’s eyes the depths of her gratitude to his master. Phileas Fogg,though brave and gallant, must be, he thought, quite heartless. As tothe sentiment which this journey might have awakened in him, there wasclearly no trace of such a thing; while poor Passepartout existed inperpetual reveries.One day he was leaning on the railing of the engine-room, and wasobserving the engine, when a sudden pitch of the steamer threw thescrew out of the water. The steam came hissing out of the valves; andthis made Passepartout indignant.“The valves are not sufficiently charged!” he exclaimed. “We are notgoing. Oh, these English! If this was an American craft, we should blowup, perhaps, but we should at all events go faster!”CHAPTER XVIII.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG, PASSEPARTOUT, AND FIX GO EACH ABOUT HIS BUSINESSThe weather was bad during the latter days of the voyage. The wind,obstinately remaining in the north-west, blew a gale, and retarded thesteamer. The “Rangoon” rolled heavily and the passengers becameimpatient of the long, monstrous waves which the wind raised beforetheir path. A sort of tempest arose on the 3rd of November, the squallknocking the vessel about with fury, and the waves running high. The“Rangoon” reefed all her sails, and even the rigging proved too much,whistling and shaking amid the squall. The steamer was forced toproceed slowly, and the captain estimated that she would reach HongKong twenty hours behind time, and more if the storm lasted.Phileas Fogg gazed at the tempestuous sea, which seemed to bestruggling especially to delay him, with his habitual tranquillity. Henever changed countenance for an instant, though a delay of twentyhours, by making him too late for the Yokohama boat, would almostinevitably cause the loss of the wager. But this man of nervemanifested neither impatience nor annoyance; it seemed as if the stormwere a part of his programme, and had been foreseen. Aouda was amazedto find him as calm as he had been from the first time she saw him.Fix did not look at the state of things in the same light. The stormgreatly pleased him. His satisfaction would have been complete had the“Rangoon” been forced to retreat before the violence of wind and waves.Each delay filled him with hope, for it became more and more probablethat Fogg would be obliged to remain some days at Hong Kong; and nowthe heavens themselves became his allies, with the gusts and squalls.It mattered not that they made him sea-sick—he made no account of thisinconvenience; and, whilst his body was writhing under their effects,his spirit bounded with hopeful exultation.Passepartout was enraged beyond expression by the unpropitious weather.Everything had gone so well till now! Earth and sea had seemed to be athis master’s service; steamers and railways obeyed him; wind and steamunited to speed his journey. Had the hour of adversity come?Passepartout was as much excited as if the twenty thousand pounds wereto come from his own pocket. The storm exasperated him, the gale madehim furious, and he longed to lash the obstinate sea into obedience.Poor fellow! Fix carefully concealed from him his own satisfaction,for, had he betrayed it, Passepartout could scarcely have restrainedhimself from personal violence.Passepartout remained on deck as long as the tempest lasted, beingunable to remain quiet below, and taking it into his head to aid theprogress of the ship by lending a hand with the crew. He overwhelmedthe captain, officers, and sailors, who could not help laughing at hisimpatience, with all sorts of questions. He wanted to know exactly howlong the storm was going to last; whereupon he was referred to thebarometer, which seemed to have no intention of rising. Passepartoutshook it, but with no perceptible effect; for neither shaking normaledictions could prevail upon it to change its mind.On the 4th, however, the sea became more calm, and the storm lessenedits violence; the wind veered southward, and was once more favourable.Passepartout cleared up with the weather. Some of the sails wereunfurled, and the “Rangoon” resumed its most rapid speed. The time lostcould not, however, be regained. Land was not signalled until fiveo’clock on the morning of the 6th; the steamer was due on the 5th.Phileas Fogg was twenty-four hours behind-hand, and the Yokohamasteamer would, of course, be missed.The pilot went on board at six, and took his place on the bridge, toguide the “Rangoon” through the channels to the port of Hong Kong.Passepartout longed to ask him if the steamer had left for Yokohama;but he dared not, for he wished to preserve the spark of hope, whichstill remained till the last moment. He had confided his anxiety to Fixwho—the sly rascal!—tried to console him by saying that Mr. Fogg wouldbe in time if he took the next boat; but this only put Passepartout ina passion.Mr. Fogg, bolder than his servant, did not hesitate to approach thepilot, and tranquilly ask him if he knew when a steamer would leaveHong Kong for Yokohama.“At high tide to-morrow morning,” answered the pilot.“Ah!” said Mr. Fogg, without betraying any astonishment.Passepartout, who heard what passed, would willingly have embraced thepilot, while Fix would have been glad to twist his neck.“What is the steamer’s name?” asked Mr. Fogg.“The ‘Carnatic.’”“Ought she not to have gone yesterday?”“Yes, sir; but they had to repair one of her boilers, and so herdeparture was postponed till to-morrow.”“Thank you,” returned Mr. Fogg, descending mathematically to thesaloon.Passepartout clasped the pilot’s hand and shook it heartily in hisdelight, exclaiming, “Pilot, you are the best of good fellows!”The pilot probably does not know to this day why his responses won himthis enthusiastic greeting. He remounted the bridge, and guided thesteamer through the flotilla of junks, tankas, and fishing boats whichcrowd the harbour of Hong Kong.At one o’clock the “Rangoon” was at the quay, and the passengers weregoing ashore.Chance had strangely favoured Phileas Fogg, for had not the “Carnatic”been forced to lie over for repairing her boilers, she would have lefton the 6th of November, and the passengers for Japan would have beenobliged to await for a week the sailing of the next steamer. Mr. Foggwas, it is true, twenty-four hours behind his time; but this could notseriously imperil the remainder of his tour.The steamer which crossed the Pacific from Yokohama to San Franciscomade a direct connection with that from Hong Kong, and it could notsail until the latter reached Yokohama; and if Mr. Fogg was twenty-fourhours late on reaching Yokohama, this time would no doubt be easilyregained in the voyage of twenty-two days across the Pacific. He foundhimself, then, about twenty-four hours behind-hand, thirty-five daysafter leaving London.The “Carnatic” was announced to leave Hong Kong at five the nextmorning. Mr. Fogg had sixteen hours in which to attend to his businessthere, which was to deposit Aouda safely with her wealthy relative.On landing, he conducted her to a palanquin, in which they repaired tothe Club Hotel. A room was engaged for the young woman, and Mr. Fogg,after seeing that she wanted for nothing, set out in search of hercousin Jeejeeh. He instructed Passepartout to remain at the hotel untilhis return, that Aouda might not be left entirely alone.Mr. Fogg repaired to the Exchange, where, he did not doubt, every onewould know so wealthy and considerable a personage as the Parseemerchant. Meeting a broker, he made the inquiry, to learn that Jeejeehhad left China two years before, and, retiring from business with animmense fortune, had taken up his residence in Europe—in Holland thebroker thought, with the merchants of which country he had principallytraded. Phileas Fogg returned to the hotel, begged a moment’sconversation with Aouda, and without more ado, apprised her thatJeejeeh was no longer at Hong Kong, but probably in Holland.Aouda at first said nothing. She passed her hand across her forehead,and reflected a few moments. Then, in her sweet, soft voice, she said:“What ought I to do, Mr. Fogg?”“It is very simple,” responded the gentleman. “Go on to Europe.”“But I cannot intrude—”“You do not intrude, nor do you in the least embarrass my project.Passepartout!”“Monsieur.”“Go to the ‘Carnatic,’ and engage three cabins.”Passepartout, delighted that the young woman, who was very gracious tohim, was going to continue the journey with them, went off at a briskgait to obey his master’s order.CHAPTER XIX.IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT TAKES A TOO GREAT INTEREST IN HIS MASTER, ANDWHAT COMES OF ITHong Kong is an island which came into the possession of the English bythe Treaty of Nankin, after the war of 1842; and the colonising geniusof the English has created upon it an important city and an excellentport. The island is situated at the mouth of the Canton River, and isseparated by about sixty miles from the Portuguese town of Macao, onthe opposite coast. Hong Kong has beaten Macao in the struggle for theChinese trade, and now the greater part of the transportation ofChinese goods finds its depot at the former place. Docks, hospitals,wharves, a Gothic cathedral, a government house, macadamised streets,give to Hong Kong the appearance of a town in Kent or Surreytransferred by some strange magic to the antipodes.Passepartout wandered, with his hands in his pockets, towards theVictoria port, gazing as he went at the curious palanquins and othermodes of conveyance, and the groups of Chinese, Japanese, and Europeanswho passed to and fro in the streets. Hong Kong seemed to him notunlike Bombay, Calcutta, and Singapore, since, like them, it betrayedeverywhere the evidence of English supremacy. At the Victoria port hefound a confused mass of ships of all nations: English, French,American, and Dutch, men-of-war and trading vessels, Japanese andChinese junks, sempas, tankas, and flower-boats, which formed so manyfloating parterres. Passepartout noticed in the crowd a number of thenatives who seemed very old and were dressed in yellow. On going into abarber’s to get shaved he learned that these ancient men were all atleast eighty years old, at which age they are permitted to wear yellow,which is the Imperial colour. Passepartout, without exactly knowingwhy, thought this very funny.On reaching the quay where they were to embark on the “Carnatic,” hewas not astonished to find Fix walking up and down. The detectiveseemed very much disturbed and disappointed.“This is bad,” muttered Passepartout, “for the gentlemen of the ReformClub!” He accosted Fix with a merry smile, as if he had not perceivedthat gentleman’s chagrin. The detective had, indeed, good reasons toinveigh against the bad luck which pursued him. The warrant had notcome! It was certainly on the way, but as certainly it could not nowreach Hong Kong for several days; and, this being the last Englishterritory on Mr. Fogg’s route, the robber would escape, unless he couldmanage to detain him.“Well, Monsieur Fix,” said Passepartout, “have you decided to go withus so far as America?”“Yes,” returned Fix, through his set teeth.“Good!” exclaimed Passepartout, laughing heartily. “I knew you couldnot persuade yourself to separate from us. Come and engage your berth.”They entered the steamer office and secured cabins for four persons.The clerk, as he gave them the tickets, informed them that, the repairson the “Carnatic” having been completed, the steamer would leave thatvery evening, and not next morning, as had been announced.“That will suit my master all the better,” said Passepartout. “I willgo and let him know.”Fix now decided to make a bold move; he resolved to tell Passepartoutall. It seemed to be the only possible means of keeping Phileas Foggseveral days longer at Hong Kong. He accordingly invited his companioninto a tavern which caught his eye on the quay. On entering, they foundthemselves in a large room handsomely decorated, at the end of whichwas a large camp-bed furnished with cushions. Several persons lay uponthis bed in a deep sleep. At the small tables which were arranged aboutthe room some thirty customers were drinking English beer, porter, gin,and brandy; smoking, the while, long red clay pipes stuffed with littleballs of opium mingled with essence of rose. From time to time one ofthe smokers, overcome with the narcotic, would slip under the table,whereupon the waiters, taking him by the head and feet, carried andlaid him upon the bed. The bed already supported twenty of thesestupefied sots.Fix and Passepartout saw that they were in a smoking-house haunted bythose wretched, cadaverous, idiotic creatures to whom the Englishmerchants sell every year the miserable drug called opium, to theamount of one million four hundred thousand pounds—thousands devoted toone of the most despicable vices which afflict humanity! The Chinesegovernment has in vain attempted to deal with the evil by stringentlaws. It passed gradually from the rich, to whom it was at firstexclusively reserved, to the lower classes, and then its ravages couldnot be arrested. Opium is smoked everywhere, at all times, by men andwomen, in the Celestial Empire; and, once accustomed to it, the victimscannot dispense with it, except by suffering horrible bodilycontortions and agonies. A great smoker can smoke as many as eightpipes a day; but he dies in five years. It was in one of these densthat Fix and Passepartout, in search of a friendly glass, foundthemselves. Passepartout had no money, but willingly accepted Fix’sinvitation in the hope of returning the obligation at some future time.They ordered two bottles of port, to which the Frenchman did amplejustice, whilst Fix observed him with close attention. They chattedabout the journey, and Passepartout was especially merry at the ideathat Fix was going to continue it with them. When the bottles wereempty, however, he rose to go and tell his master of the change in thetime of the sailing of the “Carnatic.”Fix caught him by the arm, and said, “Wait a moment.”“What for, Mr. Fix?”“I want to have a serious talk with you.”“A serious talk!” cried Passepartout, drinking up the little wine thatwas left in the bottom of his glass. “Well, we’ll talk about itto-morrow; I haven’t time now.”“Stay! What I have to say concerns your master.”Passepartout, at this, looked attentively at his companion. Fix’s faceseemed to have a singular expression. He resumed his seat.“What is it that you have to say?”Fix placed his hand upon Passepartout’s arm, and, lowering his voice,said, “You have guessed who I am?”“Parbleu!” said Passepartout, smiling.“Then I’m going to tell you everything—”“Now that I know everything, my friend! Ah! that’s very good. But goon, go on. First, though, let me tell you that those gentlemen have putthemselves to a useless expense.”“Useless!” said Fix. “You speak confidently. It’s clear that you don’tknow how large the sum is.”“Of course I do,” returned Passepartout. “Twenty thousand pounds.”“Fifty-five thousand!” answered Fix, pressing his companion’s hand.“What!” cried the Frenchman. “Has Monsieur Fogg dared—fifty-fivethousand pounds! Well, there’s all the more reason for not losing aninstant,” he continued, getting up hastily.Fix pushed Passepartout back in his chair, and resumed: “Fifty-fivethousand pounds; and if I succeed, I get two thousand pounds. If you’llhelp me, I’ll let you have five hundred of them.”“Help you?” cried Passepartout, whose eyes were standing wide open.“Yes; help me keep Mr. Fogg here for two or three days.”“Why, what are you saying? Those gentlemen are not satisfied withfollowing my master and suspecting his honour, but they must try to putobstacles in his way! I blush for them!”“What do you mean?”“I mean that it is a piece of shameful trickery. They might as wellwaylay Mr. Fogg and put his money in their pockets!”“That’s just what we count on doing.”“It’s a conspiracy, then,” cried Passepartout, who became more and moreexcited as the liquor mounted in his head, for he drank withoutperceiving it. “A real conspiracy! And gentlemen, too. Bah!”Fix began to be puzzled.“Members of the Reform Club!” continued Passepartout. “You must know,Monsieur Fix, that my master is an honest man, and that, when he makesa wager, he tries to win it fairly!”“But who do you think I am?” asked Fix, looking at him intently.“Parbleu! An agent of the members of the Reform Club, sent out here tointerrupt my master’s journey. But, though I found you out some timeago, I’ve taken good care to say nothing about it to Mr. Fogg.”“He knows nothing, then?”“Nothing,” replied Passepartout, again emptying his glass.The detective passed his hand across his forehead, hesitating before hespoke again. What should he do? Passepartout’s mistake seemed sincere,but it made his design more difficult. It was evident that the servantwas not the master’s accomplice, as Fix had been inclined to suspect.“Well,” said the detective to himself, “as he is not an accomplice, hewill help me.”He had no time to lose: Fogg must be detained at Hong Kong, so heresolved to make a clean breast of it.“Listen to me,” said Fix abruptly. “I am not, as you think, an agent ofthe members of the Reform Club—”“Bah!” retorted Passepartout, with an air of raillery.“I am a police detective, sent out here by the London office.”“You, a detective?”“I will prove it. Here is my commission.”Passepartout was speechless with astonishment when Fix displayed thisdocument, the genuineness of which could not be doubted.“Mr. Fogg’s wager,” resumed Fix, “is only a pretext, of which you andthe gentlemen of the Reform are dupes. He had a motive for securingyour innocent complicity.”“But why?”“Listen. On the 28th of last September a robbery of fifty-five thousandpounds was committed at the Bank of England by a person whosedescription was fortunately secured. Here is his description; itanswers exactly to that of Mr. Phileas Fogg.”“What nonsense!” cried Passepartout, striking the table with his fist.“My master is the most honourable of men!”“How can you tell? You know scarcely anything about him. You went intohis service the day he came away; and he came away on a foolishpretext, without trunks, and carrying a large amount in banknotes. Andyet you are bold enough to assert that he is an honest man!”“Yes, yes,” repeated the poor fellow, mechanically.“Would you like to be arrested as his accomplice?”Passepartout, overcome by what he had heard, held his head between hishands, and did not dare to look at the detective. Phileas Fogg, thesaviour of Aouda, that brave and generous man, a robber! And yet howmany presumptions there were against him! Passepartout essayed toreject the suspicions which forced themselves upon his mind; he did notwish to believe that his master was guilty.“Well, what do you want of me?” said he, at last, with an effort.“See here,” replied Fix; “I have tracked Mr. Fogg to this place, but asyet I have failed to receive the warrant of arrest for which I sent toLondon. You must help me to keep him here in Hong Kong—”“I! But I—”“I will share with you the two thousand pounds reward offered by theBank of England.”“Never!” replied Passepartout, who tried to rise, but fell back,exhausted in mind and body.“Mr. Fix,” he stammered, “even should what you say be true—if my masteris really the robber you are seeking for—which I deny—I have been, am,in his service; I have seen his generosity and goodness; and I willnever betray him—not for all the gold in the world. I come from avillage where they don’t eat that kind of bread!”“You refuse?”“I refuse.”“Consider that I’ve said nothing,” said Fix; “and let us drink.”“Yes; let us drink!”Passepartout felt himself yielding more and more to the effects of theliquor. Fix, seeing that he must, at all hazards, be separated from hismaster, wished to entirely overcome him. Some pipes full of opium layupon the table. Fix slipped one into Passepartout’s hand. He took it,put it between his lips, lit it, drew several puffs, and his head,becoming heavy under the influence of the narcotic, fell upon thetable.“At last!” said Fix, seeing Passepartout unconscious. “Mr. Fogg willnot be informed of the ‘Carnatic’s’ departure; and, if he is, he willhave to go without this cursed Frenchman!”And, after paying his bill, Fix left the tavern.CHAPTER XX.IN WHICH FIX COMES FACE TO FACE WITH PHILEAS FOGGWhile these events were passing at the opium-house, Mr. Fogg,unconscious of the danger he was in of losing the steamer, was quietlyescorting Aouda about the streets of the English quarter, making thenecessary purchases for the long voyage before them. It was all verywell for an Englishman like Mr. Fogg to make the tour of the world witha carpet-bag; a lady could not be expected to travel comfortably undersuch conditions. He acquitted his task with characteristic serenity,and invariably replied to the remonstrances of his fair companion, whowas confused by his patience and generosity:“It is in the interest of my journey—a part of my programme.”The purchases made, they returned to the hotel, where they dined at asumptuously served _table-d’hôte;_ after which Aouda, shaking handswith her protector after the English fashion, retired to her room forrest. Mr. Fogg absorbed himself throughout the evening in the perusalof the _Times_ and _Illustrated London News_.Had he been capable of being astonished at anything, it would have beennot to see his servant return at bedtime. But, knowing that the steamerwas not to leave for Yokohama until the next morning, he did notdisturb himself about the matter. When Passepartout did not appear thenext morning to answer his master’s bell, Mr. Fogg, not betraying theleast vexation, contented himself with taking his carpet-bag, callingAouda, and sending for a palanquin.It was then eight o’clock; at half-past nine, it being then high tide,the “Carnatic” would leave the harbour. Mr. Fogg and Aouda got into thepalanquin, their luggage being brought after on a wheelbarrow, and halfan hour later stepped upon the quay whence they were to embark. Mr.Fogg then learned that the “Carnatic” had sailed the evening before. Hehad expected to find not only the steamer, but his domestic, and wasforced to give up both; but no sign of disappointment appeared on hisface, and he merely remarked to Aouda, “It is an accident, madam;nothing more.”At this moment a man who had been observing him attentively approached.It was Fix, who, bowing, addressed Mr. Fogg: “Were you not, like me,sir, a passenger by the ‘Rangoon,’ which arrived yesterday?”“I was, sir,” replied Mr. Fogg coldly. “But I have not the honour—”“Pardon me; I thought I should find your servant here.”“Do you know where he is, sir?” asked Aouda anxiously.“What!” responded Fix, feigning surprise. “Is he not with you?”“No,” said Aouda. “He has not made his appearance since yesterday.Could he have gone on board the ‘Carnatic’ without us?”“Without you, madam?” answered the detective. “Excuse me, did youintend to sail in the ‘Carnatic’?”“Yes, sir.”“So did I, madam, and I am excessively disappointed. The ‘Carnatic’,its repairs being completed, left Hong Kong twelve hours before thestated time, without any notice being given; and we must now wait aweek for another steamer.”As he said “a week” Fix felt his heart leap for joy. Fogg detained atHong Kong for a week! There would be time for the warrant to arrive,and fortune at last favoured the representative of the law. His horrormay be imagined when he heard Mr. Fogg say, in his placid voice, “Butthere are other vessels besides the ‘Carnatic,’ it seems to me, in theharbour of Hong Kong.”And, offering his arm to Aouda, he directed his steps toward the docksin search of some craft about to start. Fix, stupefied, followed; itseemed as if he were attached to Mr. Fogg by an invisible thread.Chance, however, appeared really to have abandoned the man it hadhitherto served so well. For three hours Phileas Fogg wandered aboutthe docks, with the determination, if necessary, to charter a vessel tocarry him to Yokohama; but he could only find vessels which wereloading or unloading, and which could not therefore set sail. Fix beganto hope again.But Mr. Fogg, far from being discouraged, was continuing his search,resolved not to stop if he had to resort to Macao, when he was accostedby a sailor on one of the wharves.“Is your honour looking for a boat?”“Have you a boat ready to sail?”“Yes, your honour; a pilot-boat—No. 43—the best in the harbour.”“Does she go fast?”“Between eight and nine knots the hour. Will you look at her?”“Yes.”“Your honour will be satisfied with her. Is it for a sea excursion?”“No; for a voyage.”“A voyage?”“Yes, will you agree to take me to Yokohama?”The sailor leaned on the railing, opened his eyes wide, and said, “Isyour honour joking?”“No. I have missed the ‘Carnatic,’ and I must get to Yokohama by the14th at the latest, to take the boat for San Francisco.”“I am sorry,” said the sailor; “but it is impossible.”“I offer you a hundred pounds per day, and an additional reward of twohundred pounds if I reach Yokohama in time.”“Are you in earnest?”“Very much so.”The pilot walked away a little distance, and gazed out to sea,evidently struggling between the anxiety to gain a large sum and thefear of venturing so far. Fix was in mortal suspense.Mr. Fogg turned to Aouda and asked her, “You would not be afraid, wouldyou, madam?”“Not with you, Mr. Fogg,” was her answer.The pilot now returned, shuffling his hat in his hands.“Well, pilot?” said Mr. Fogg.“Well, your honour,” replied he, “I could not risk myself, my men, ormy little boat of scarcely twenty tons on so long a voyage at this timeof year. Besides, we could not reach Yokohama in time, for it issixteen hundred and sixty miles from Hong Kong.”“Only sixteen hundred,” said Mr. Fogg.“It’s the same thing.”Fix breathed more freely.“But,” added the pilot, “it might be arranged another way.”Fix ceased to breathe at all.“How?” asked Mr. Fogg.“By going to Nagasaki, at the extreme south of Japan, or even toShanghai, which is only eight hundred miles from here. In going toShanghai we should not be forced to sail wide of the Chinese coast,which would be a great advantage, as the currents run northward, andwould aid us.”“Pilot,” said Mr. Fogg, “I must take the American steamer at Yokohama,and not at Shanghai or Nagasaki.”“Why not?” returned the pilot. “The San Francisco steamer does notstart from Yokohama. It puts in at Yokohama and Nagasaki, but it startsfrom Shanghai.”“You are sure of that?”“Perfectly.”“And when does the boat leave Shanghai?”“On the 11th, at seven in the evening. We have, therefore, four daysbefore us, that is ninety-six hours; and in that time, if we had goodluck and a south-west wind, and the sea was calm, we could make thoseeight hundred miles to Shanghai.”“And you could go—”“In an hour; as soon as provisions could be got aboard and the sailsput up.”“It is a bargain. Are you the master of the boat?”“Yes; John Bunsby, master of the ‘Tankadere.’”“Would you like some earnest-money?”“If it would not put your honour out—”“Here are two hundred pounds on account sir,” added Phileas Fogg,turning to Fix, “if you would like to take advantage—”“Thanks, sir; I was about to ask the favour.”“Very well. In half an hour we shall go on board.”“But poor Passepartout?” urged Aouda, who was much disturbed by theservant’s disappearance.“I shall do all I can to find him,” replied Phileas Fogg.While Fix, in a feverish, nervous state, repaired to the pilot-boat,the others directed their course to the police-station at Hong Kong.Phileas Fogg there gave Passepartout’s description, and left a sum ofmoney to be spent in the search for him. The same formalities havingbeen gone through at the French consulate, and the palanquin havingstopped at the hotel for the luggage, which had been sent back there,they returned to the wharf.It was now three o’clock; and pilot-boat No. 43, with its crew onboard, and its provisions stored away, was ready for departure.The “Tankadere” was a neat little craft of twenty tons, as gracefullybuilt as if she were a racing yacht. Her shining copper sheathing, hergalvanised iron-work, her deck, white as ivory, betrayed the pridetaken by John Bunsby in making her presentable. Her two masts leaned atrifle backward; she carried brigantine, foresail, storm-jib, andstanding-jib, and was well rigged for running before the wind; and sheseemed capable of brisk speed, which, indeed, she had already proved bygaining several prizes in pilot-boat races. The crew of the “Tankadere”was composed of John Bunsby, the master, and four hardy mariners, whowere familiar with the Chinese seas. John Bunsby, himself, a man offorty-five or thereabouts, vigorous, sunburnt, with a sprightlyexpression of the eye, and energetic and self-reliant countenance,would have inspired confidence in the most timid.Phileas Fogg and Aouda went on board, where they found Fix alreadyinstalled. Below deck was a square cabin, of which the walls bulged outin the form of cots, above a circular divan; in the centre was a tableprovided with a swinging lamp. The accommodation was confined, butneat.“I am sorry to have nothing better to offer you,” said Mr. Fogg to Fix,who bowed without responding.The detective had a feeling akin to humiliation in profiting by thekindness of Mr. Fogg.“It’s certain,” thought he, “though rascal as he is, he is a politeone!”The sails and the English flag were hoisted at ten minutes past three.Mr. Fogg and Aouda, who were seated on deck, cast a last glance at thequay, in the hope of espying Passepartout. Fix was not without hisfears lest chance should direct the steps of the unfortunate servant,whom he had so badly treated, in this direction; in which case anexplanation the reverse of satisfactory to the detective must haveensued. But the Frenchman did not appear, and, without doubt, was stilllying under the stupefying influence of the opium.John Bunsby, master, at length gave the order to start, and the“Tankadere,” taking the wind under her brigantine, foresail, andstanding-jib, bounded briskly forward over the waves.CHAPTER XXI.IN WHICH THE MASTER OF THE “TANKADERE” RUNS GREAT RISK OF LOSING AREWARD OF TWO HUNDRED POUNDSThis voyage of eight hundred miles was a perilous venture on a craft oftwenty tons, and at that season of the year. The Chinese seas areusually boisterous, subject to terrible gales of wind, and especiallyduring the equinoxes; and it was now early November.It would clearly have been to the master’s advantage to carry hispassengers to Yokohama, since he was paid a certain sum per day; but hewould have been rash to attempt such a voyage, and it was imprudenteven to attempt to reach Shanghai. But John Bunsby believed in the“Tankadere,” which rode on the waves like a seagull; and perhaps he wasnot wrong.Late in the day they passed through the capricious channels of HongKong, and the “Tankadere,” impelled by favourable winds, conductedherself admirably.“I do not need, pilot,” said Phileas Fogg, when they got into the opensea, “to advise you to use all possible speed.”“Trust me, your honour. We are carrying all the sail the wind will letus. The poles would add nothing, and are only used when we are goinginto port.”“It’s your trade, not mine, pilot, and I confide in you.”Phileas Fogg, with body erect and legs wide apart, standing like asailor, gazed without staggering at the swelling waters. The youngwoman, who was seated aft, was profoundly affected as she looked outupon the ocean, darkening now with the twilight, on which she hadventured in so frail a vessel. Above her head rustled the white sails,which seemed like great white wings. The boat, carried forward by thewind, seemed to be flying in the air.Night came. The moon was entering her first quarter, and herinsufficient light would soon die out in the mist on the horizon.Clouds were rising from the east, and already overcast a part of theheavens.The pilot had hung out his lights, which was very necessary in theseseas crowded with vessels bound landward; for collisions are notuncommon occurrences, and, at the speed she was going, the least shockwould shatter the gallant little craft.Fix, seated in the bow, gave himself up to meditation. He kept apartfrom his fellow-travellers, knowing Mr. Fogg’s taciturn tastes;besides, he did not quite like to talk to the man whose favours he hadaccepted. He was thinking, too, of the future. It seemed certain thatFogg would not stop at Yokohama, but would at once take the boat forSan Francisco; and the vast extent of America would ensure him impunityand safety. Fogg’s plan appeared to him the simplest in the world.Instead of sailing directly from England to the United States, like acommon villain, he had traversed three quarters of the globe, so as togain the American continent more surely; and there, after throwing thepolice off his track, he would quietly enjoy himself with the fortunestolen from the bank. But, once in the United States, what should he,Fix, do? Should he abandon this man? No, a hundred times no! Until hehad secured his extradition, he would not lose sight of him for anhour. It was his duty, and he would fulfil it to the end. At allevents, there was one thing to be thankful for; Passepartout was notwith his master; and it was above all important, after the confidencesFix had imparted to him, that the servant should never have speech withhis master.Phileas Fogg was also thinking of Passepartout, who had so strangelydisappeared. Looking at the matter from every point of view, it did notseem to him impossible that, by some mistake, the man might haveembarked on the “Carnatic” at the last moment; and this was alsoAouda’s opinion, who regretted very much the loss of the worthy fellowto whom she owed so much. They might then find him at Yokohama; for, ifthe “Carnatic” was carrying him thither, it would be easy to ascertainif he had been on board.A brisk breeze arose about ten o’clock; but, though it might have beenprudent to take in a reef, the pilot, after carefully examining theheavens, let the craft remain rigged as before. The “Tankadere” boresail admirably, as she drew a great deal of water, and everything wasprepared for high speed in case of a gale.Mr. Fogg and Aouda descended into the cabin at midnight, having beenalready preceded by Fix, who had lain down on one of the cots. Thepilot and crew remained on deck all night.At sunrise the next day, which was 8th November, the boat had made morethan one hundred miles. The log indicated a mean speed of between eightand nine miles. The “Tankadere” still carried all sail, and wasaccomplishing her greatest capacity of speed. If the wind held as itwas, the chances would be in her favour. During the day she kept alongthe coast, where the currents were favourable; the coast, irregular inprofile, and visible sometimes across the clearings, was at most fivemiles distant. The sea was less boisterous, since the wind came offland—a fortunate circumstance for the boat, which would suffer, owingto its small tonnage, by a heavy surge on the sea.The breeze subsided a little towards noon, and set in from thesouth-west. The pilot put up his poles, but took them down again withintwo hours, as the wind freshened up anew.Mr. Fogg and Aouda, happily unaffected by the roughness of the sea, atewith a good appetite, Fix being invited to share their repast, which heaccepted with secret chagrin. To travel at this man’s expense and liveupon his provisions was not palatable to him. Still, he was obliged toeat, and so he ate.When the meal was over, he took Mr. Fogg apart, and said, “sir”—this“sir” scorched his lips, and he had to control himself to avoidcollaring this “gentleman”—“sir, you have been very kind to give me apassage on this boat. But, though my means will not admit of myexpending them as freely as you, I must ask to pay my share—”“Let us not speak of that, sir,” replied Mr. Fogg.“But, if I insist—”“No, sir,” repeated Mr. Fogg, in a tone which did not admit of a reply.“This enters into my general expenses.”Fix, as he bowed, had a stifled feeling, and, going forward, where heensconced himself, did not open his mouth for the rest of the day.Meanwhile they were progressing famously, and John Bunsby was in highhope. He several times assured Mr. Fogg that they would reach Shanghaiin time; to which that gentleman responded that he counted upon it. Thecrew set to work in good earnest, inspired by the reward to be gained.There was not a sheet which was not tightened, not a sail which was notvigorously hoisted; not a lurch could be charged to the man at thehelm. They worked as desperately as if they were contesting in a Royalyacht regatta.By evening, the log showed that two hundred and twenty miles had beenaccomplished from Hong Kong, and Mr. Fogg might hope that he would beable to reach Yokohama without recording any delay in his journal; inwhich case, the many misadventures which had overtaken him since heleft London would not seriously affect his journey.The “Tankadere” entered the Straits of Fo-Kien, which separate theisland of Formosa from the Chinese coast, in the small hours of thenight, and crossed the Tropic of Cancer. The sea was very rough in thestraits, full of eddies formed by the counter-currents, and thechopping waves broke her course, whilst it became very difficult tostand on deck.At daybreak the wind began to blow hard again, and the heavens seemedto predict a gale. The barometer announced a speedy change, the mercuryrising and falling capriciously; the sea also, in the south-east,raised long surges which indicated a tempest. The sun had set theevening before in a red mist, in the midst of the phosphorescentscintillations of the ocean.John Bunsby long examined the threatening aspect of the heavens,muttering indistinctly between his teeth. At last he said in a lowvoice to Mr. Fogg, “Shall I speak out to your honour?”“Of course.”“Well, we are going to have a squall.”“Is the wind north or south?” asked Mr. Fogg quietly.“South. Look! a typhoon is coming up.”“Glad it’s a typhoon from the south, for it will carry us forward.”“Oh, if you take it that way,” said John Bunsby, “I’ve nothing more tosay.” John Bunsby’s suspicions were confirmed. At a less advancedseason of the year the typhoon, according to a famous meteorologist,would have passed away like a luminous cascade of electric flame; butin the winter equinox it was to be feared that it would burst upon themwith great violence.The pilot took his precautions in advance. He reefed all sail, thepole-masts were dispensed with; all hands went forward to the bows. Asingle triangular sail, of strong canvas, was hoisted as a storm-jib,so as to hold the wind from behind. Then they waited.John Bunsby had requested his passengers to go below; but thisimprisonment in so narrow a space, with little air, and the boatbouncing in the gale, was far from pleasant. Neither Mr. Fogg, Fix, norAouda consented to leave the deck.The storm of rain and wind descended upon them towards eight o’clock.With but its bit of sail, the “Tankadere” was lifted like a feather bya wind, an idea of whose violence can scarcely be given. To compare herspeed to four times that of a locomotive going on full steam would bebelow the truth.The boat scudded thus northward during the whole day, borne on bymonstrous waves, preserving always, fortunately, a speed equal totheirs. Twenty times she seemed almost to be submerged by thesemountains of water which rose behind her; but the adroit management ofthe pilot saved her. The passengers were often bathed in spray, butthey submitted to it philosophically. Fix cursed it, no doubt; butAouda, with her eyes fastened upon her protector, whose coolness amazedher, showed herself worthy of him, and bravely weathered the storm. Asfor Phileas Fogg, it seemed just as if the typhoon were a part of hisprogramme.Up to this time the “Tankadere” had always held her course to thenorth; but towards evening the wind, veering three quarters, bore downfrom the north-west. The boat, now lying in the trough of the waves,shook and rolled terribly; the sea struck her with fearful violence. Atnight the tempest increased in violence. John Bunsby saw the approachof darkness and the rising of the storm with dark misgivings. Hethought awhile, and then asked his crew if it was not time to slackenspeed. After a consultation he approached Mr. Fogg, and said, “I think,your honour, that we should do well to make for one of the ports on thecoast.”“I think so too.”“Ah!” said the pilot. “But which one?”“I know of but one,” returned Mr. Fogg tranquilly.“And that is—”“Shanghai.”The pilot, at first, did not seem to comprehend; he could scarcelyrealise so much determination and tenacity. Then he cried, “Well—yes!Your honour is right. To Shanghai!”So the “Tankadere” kept steadily on her northward track.The night was really terrible; it would be a miracle if the craft didnot founder. Twice it could have been all over with her if the crew hadnot been constantly on the watch. Aouda was exhausted, but did notutter a complaint. More than once Mr. Fogg rushed to protect her fromthe violence of the waves.Day reappeared. The tempest still raged with undiminished fury; but thewind now returned to the south-east. It was a favourable change, andthe “Tankadere” again bounded forward on this mountainous sea, thoughthe waves crossed each other, and imparted shocks and counter-shockswhich would have crushed a craft less solidly built. From time to timethe coast was visible through the broken mist, but no vessel was insight. The “Tankadere” was alone upon the sea.There were some signs of a calm at noon, and these became more distinctas the sun descended toward the horizon. The tempest had been as briefas terrific. The passengers, thoroughly exhausted, could now eat alittle, and take some repose.The night was comparatively quiet. Some of the sails were againhoisted, and the speed of the boat was very good. The next morning atdawn they espied the coast, and John Bunsby was able to assert thatthey were not one hundred miles from Shanghai. A hundred miles, andonly one day to traverse them! That very evening Mr. Fogg was due atShanghai, if he did not wish to miss the steamer to Yokohama. Had therebeen no storm, during which several hours were lost, they would be atthis moment within thirty miles of their destination.The wind grew decidedly calmer, and happily the sea fell with it. Allsails were now hoisted, and at noon the “Tankadere” was withinforty-five miles of Shanghai. There remained yet six hours in which toaccomplish that distance. All on board feared that it could not bedone, and every one—Phileas Fogg, no doubt, excepted—felt his heartbeat with impatience. The boat must keep up an average of nine miles anhour, and the wind was becoming calmer every moment! It was acapricious breeze, coming from the coast, and after it passed the seabecame smooth. Still, the “Tankadere” was so light, and her fine sailscaught the fickle zephyrs so well, that, with the aid of the currentsJohn Bunsby found himself at six o’clock not more than ten miles fromthe mouth of Shanghai River. Shanghai itself is situated at leasttwelve miles up the stream. At seven they were still three miles fromShanghai. The pilot swore an angry oath; the reward of two hundredpounds was evidently on the point of escaping him. He looked at Mr.Fogg. Mr. Fogg was perfectly tranquil; and yet his whole fortune was atthis moment at stake.At this moment, also, a long black funnel, crowned with wreaths ofsmoke, appeared on the edge of the waters. It was the American steamer,leaving for Yokohama at the appointed time.“Confound her!” cried John Bunsby, pushing back the rudder with adesperate jerk.“Signal her!” said Phileas Fogg quietly.A small brass cannon stood on the forward deck of the “Tankadere,” formaking signals in the fogs. It was loaded to the muzzle; but just asthe pilot was about to apply a red-hot coal to the touchhole, Mr. Foggsaid, “Hoist your flag!”The flag was run up at half-mast, and, this being the signal ofdistress, it was hoped that the American steamer, perceiving it, wouldchange her course a little, so as to succour the pilot-boat.“Fire!” said Mr. Fogg. And the booming of the little cannon resoundedin the air.CHAPTER XXII.IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT FINDS OUT THAT, EVEN AT THE ANTIPODES, IT ISCONVENIENT TO HAVE SOME MONEY IN ONE’S POCKETThe “Carnatic,” setting sail from Hong Kong at half-past six on the 7thof November, directed her course at full steam towards Japan. Shecarried a large cargo and a well-filled cabin of passengers. Twostate-rooms in the rear were, however, unoccupied—those which had beenengaged by Phileas Fogg.The next day a passenger with a half-stupefied eye, staggering gait,and disordered hair, was seen to emerge from the second cabin, and tototter to a seat on deck.It was Passepartout; and what had happened to him was as follows:Shortly after Fix left the opium den, two waiters had lifted theunconscious Passepartout, and had carried him to the bed reserved forthe smokers. Three hours later, pursued even in his dreams by a fixedidea, the poor fellow awoke, and struggled against the stupefyinginfluence of the narcotic. The thought of a duty unfulfilled shook offhis torpor, and he hurried from the abode of drunkenness. Staggeringand holding himself up by keeping against the walls, falling down andcreeping up again, and irresistibly impelled by a kind of instinct, hekept crying out, “The ‘Carnatic!’ the ‘Carnatic!’”The steamer lay puffing alongside the quay, on the point of starting.Passepartout had but few steps to go; and, rushing upon the plank, hecrossed it, and fell unconscious on the deck, just as the “Carnatic”was moving off. Several sailors, who were evidently accustomed to thissort of scene, carried the poor Frenchman down into the second cabin,and Passepartout did not wake until they were one hundred and fiftymiles away from China. Thus he found himself the next morning on thedeck of the “Carnatic,” and eagerly inhaling the exhilaratingsea-breeze. The pure air sobered him. He began to collect his sense,which he found a difficult task; but at last he recalled the events ofthe evening before, Fix’s revelation, and the opium-house.“It is evident,” said he to himself, “that I have been abominablydrunk! What will Mr. Fogg say? At least I have not missed the steamer,which is the most important thing.”Then, as Fix occurred to him: “As for that rascal, I hope we are wellrid of him, and that he has not dared, as he proposed, to follow us onboard the “Carnatic.” A detective on the track of Mr. Fogg, accused ofrobbing the Bank of England! Pshaw! Mr. Fogg is no more a robber than Iam a murderer.”Should he divulge Fix’s real errand to his master? Would it do to tellthe part the detective was playing? Would it not be better to waituntil Mr. Fogg reached London again, and then impart to him that anagent of the metropolitan police had been following him round theworld, and have a good laugh over it? No doubt; at least, it was worthconsidering. The first thing to do was to find Mr. Fogg, and apologisefor his singular behaviour.Passepartout got up and proceeded, as well as he could with the rollingof the steamer, to the after-deck. He saw no one who resembled eitherhis master or Aouda. “Good!” muttered he; “Aouda has not got up yet,and Mr. Fogg has probably found some partners at whist.”He descended to the saloon. Mr. Fogg was not there. Passepartout hadonly, however, to ask the purser the number of his master’s state-room.The purser replied that he did not know any passenger by the name ofFogg.“I beg your pardon,” said Passepartout persistently. “He is a tallgentleman, quiet, and not very talkative, and has with him a younglady—”“There is no young lady on board,” interrupted the purser. “Here is alist of the passengers; you may see for yourself.”Passepartout scanned the list, but his master’s name was not upon it.All at once an idea struck him.“Ah! am I on the ‘Carnatic?’”“Yes.”“On the way to Yokohama?”“Certainly.”Passepartout had for an instant feared that he was on the wrong boat;but, though he was really on the “Carnatic,” his master was not there.He fell thunderstruck on a seat. He saw it all now. He remembered thatthe time of sailing had been changed, that he should have informed hismaster of that fact, and that he had not done so. It was his fault,then, that Mr. Fogg and Aouda had missed the steamer. Yes, but it wasstill more the fault of the traitor who, in order to separate him fromhis master, and detain the latter at Hong Kong, had inveigled him intogetting drunk! He now saw the detective’s trick; and at this moment Mr.Fogg was certainly ruined, his bet was lost, and he himself perhapsarrested and imprisoned! At this thought Passepartout tore his hair.Ah, if Fix ever came within his reach, what a settling of accountsthere would be!After his first depression, Passepartout became calmer, and began tostudy his situation. It was certainly not an enviable one. He foundhimself on the way to Japan, and what should he do when he got there?His pocket was empty; he had not a solitary shilling, not so much as apenny. His passage had fortunately been paid for in advance; and he hadfive or six days in which to decide upon his future course. He fell toat meals with an appetite, and ate for Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and himself. Hehelped himself as generously as if Japan were a desert, where nothingto eat was to be looked for.At dawn on the 13th the “Carnatic” entered the port of Yokohama. Thisis an important port of call in the Pacific, where all themail-steamers, and those carrying travellers between North America,China, Japan, and the Oriental islands put in. It is situated in thebay of Yeddo, and at but a short distance from that second capital ofthe Japanese Empire, and the residence of the Tycoon, the civilEmperor, before the Mikado, the spiritual Emperor, absorbed his officein his own. The “Carnatic” anchored at the quay near the custom-house,in the midst of a crowd of ships bearing the flags of all nations.Passepartout went timidly ashore on this so curious territory of theSons of the Sun. He had nothing better to do than, taking chance forhis guide, to wander aimlessly through the streets of Yokohama. Hefound himself at first in a thoroughly European quarter, the houseshaving low fronts, and being adorned with verandas, beneath which hecaught glimpses of neat peristyles. This quarter occupied, with itsstreets, squares, docks, and warehouses, all the space between the“promontory of the Treaty” and the river. Here, as at Hong Kong andCalcutta, were mixed crowds of all races, Americans and English,Chinamen and Dutchmen, mostly merchants ready to buy or sell anything.The Frenchman felt himself as much alone among them as if he haddropped down in the midst of Hottentots.He had, at least, one resource,—to call on the French and Englishconsuls at Yokohama for assistance. But he shrank from telling thestory of his adventures, intimately connected as it was with that ofhis master; and, before doing so, he determined to exhaust all othermeans of aid. As chance did not favour him in the European quarter, hepenetrated that inhabited by the native Japanese, determined, ifnecessary, to push on to Yeddo.The Japanese quarter of Yokohama is called Benten, after the goddess ofthe sea, who is worshipped on the islands round about. TherePassepartout beheld beautiful fir and cedar groves, sacred gates of asingular architecture, bridges half hid in the midst of bamboos andreeds, temples shaded by immense cedar-trees, holy retreats where weresheltered Buddhist priests and sectaries of Confucius, and interminablestreets, where a perfect harvest of rose-tinted and red-cheekedchildren, who looked as if they had been cut out of Japanese screens,and who were playing in the midst of short-legged poodles and yellowishcats, might have been gathered.The streets were crowded with people. Priests were passing inprocessions, beating their dreary tambourines; police and custom-houseofficers with pointed hats encrusted with lac and carrying two sabreshung to their waists; soldiers, clad in blue cotton with white stripes,and bearing guns; the Mikado’s guards, enveloped in silken doubles,hauberks and coats of mail; and numbers of military folk of allranks—for the military profession is as much respected in Japan as itis despised in China—went hither and thither in groups and pairs.Passepartout saw, too, begging friars, long-robed pilgrims, and simplecivilians, with their warped and jet-black hair, big heads, long busts,slender legs, short stature, and complexions varying from copper-colourto a dead white, but never yellow, like the Chinese, from whom theJapanese widely differ. He did not fail to observe the curiousequipages—carriages and palanquins, barrows supplied with sails, andlitters made of bamboo; nor the women—whom he thought not especiallyhandsome—who took little steps with their little feet, whereon theywore canvas shoes, straw sandals, and clogs of worked wood, and whodisplayed tight-looking eyes, flat chests, teeth fashionably blackened,and gowns crossed with silken scarfs, tied in an enormous knot behindan ornament which the modern Parisian ladies seem to have borrowed fromthe dames of Japan.Passepartout wandered for several hours in the midst of this motleycrowd, looking in at the windows of the rich and curious shops, thejewellery establishments glittering with quaint Japanese ornaments, therestaurants decked with streamers and banners, the tea-houses, wherethe odorous beverage was being drunk with “saki,” a liquor concoctedfrom the fermentation of rice, and the comfortable smoking-houses,where they were puffing, not opium, which is almost unknown in Japan,but a very fine, stringy tobacco. He went on till he found himself inthe fields, in the midst of vast rice plantations. There he sawdazzling camellias expanding themselves, with flowers which were givingforth their last colours and perfumes, not on bushes, but on trees, andwithin bamboo enclosures, cherry, plum, and apple trees, which theJapanese cultivate rather for their blossoms than their fruit, andwhich queerly-fashioned, grinning scarecrows protected from thesparrows, pigeons, ravens, and other voracious birds. On the branchesof the cedars were perched large eagles; amid the foliage of theweeping willows were herons, solemnly standing on one leg; and on everyhand were crows, ducks, hawks, wild birds, and a multitude of cranes,which the Japanese consider sacred, and which to their minds symboliselong life and prosperity.As he was strolling along, Passepartout espied some violets among theshrubs.“Good!” said he; “I’ll have some supper.”But, on smelling them, he found that they were odourless.“No chance there,” thought he.The worthy fellow had certainly taken good care to eat as hearty abreakfast as possible before leaving the “Carnatic;” but, as he hadbeen walking about all day, the demands of hunger were becomingimportunate. He observed that the butchers stalls contained neithermutton, goat, nor pork; and, knowing also that it is a sacrilege tokill cattle, which are preserved solely for farming, he made up hismind that meat was far from plentiful in Yokohama—nor was he mistaken;and, in default of butcher’s meat, he could have wished for a quarterof wild boar or deer, a partridge, or some quails, some game or fish,which, with rice, the Japanese eat almost exclusively. But he found itnecessary to keep up a stout heart, and to postpone the meal he cravedtill the following morning. Night came, and Passepartout re-entered thenative quarter, where he wandered through the streets, lit byvari-coloured lanterns, looking on at the dancers, who were executingskilful steps and boundings, and the astrologers who stood in the openair with their telescopes. Then he came to the harbour, which was litup by the resin torches of the fishermen, who were fishing from theirboats.The streets at last became quiet, and the patrol, the officers ofwhich, in their splendid costumes, and surrounded by their suites,Passepartout thought seemed like ambassadors, succeeded the bustlingcrowd. Each time a company passed, Passepartout chuckled, and said tohimself: “Good! another Japanese embassy departing for Europe!”CHAPTER XXIII.IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT’S NOSE BECOMES OUTRAGEOUSLY LONGThe next morning poor, jaded, famished Passepartout said to himselfthat he must get something to eat at all hazards, and the sooner he didso the better. He might, indeed, sell his watch; but he would havestarved first. Now or never he must use the strong, if not melodiousvoice which nature had bestowed upon him. He knew several French andEnglish songs, and resolved to try them upon the Japanese, who must belovers of music, since they were for ever pounding on their cymbals,tam-tams, and tambourines, and could not but appreciate Europeantalent.It was, perhaps, rather early in the morning to get up a concert, andthe audience prematurely aroused from their slumbers, might notpossibly pay their entertainer with coin bearing the Mikado’s features.Passepartout therefore decided to wait several hours; and, as he wassauntering along, it occurred to him that he would seem rather too welldressed for a wandering artist. The idea struck him to change hisgarments for clothes more in harmony with his project; by which hemight also get a little money to satisfy the immediate cravings ofhunger. The resolution taken, it remained to carry it out.It was only after a long search that Passepartout discovered a nativedealer in old clothes, to whom he applied for an exchange. The manliked the European costume, and ere long Passepartout issued from hisshop accoutred in an old Japanese coat, and a sort of one-sided turban,faded with long use. A few small pieces of silver, moreover, jingled inhis pocket.“Good!” thought he. “I will imagine I am at the Carnival!”His first care, after being thus “Japanesed,” was to enter a tea-houseof modest appearance, and, upon half a bird and a little rice, tobreakfast like a man for whom dinner was as yet a problem to be solved.“Now,” thought he, when he had eaten heartily, “I mustn’t lose my head.I can’t sell this costume again for one still more Japanese. I mustconsider how to leave this country of the Sun, of which I shall notretain the most delightful of memories, as quickly as possible.”It occurred to him to visit the steamers which were about to leave forAmerica. He would offer himself as a cook or servant, in payment of hispassage and meals. Once at San Francisco, he would find some means ofgoing on. The difficulty was, how to traverse the four thousand sevenhundred miles of the Pacific which lay between Japan and the New World.Passepartout was not the man to let an idea go begging, and directedhis steps towards the docks. But, as he approached them, his project,which at first had seemed so simple, began to grow more and moreformidable to his mind. What need would they have of a cook or servanton an American steamer, and what confidence would they put in him,dressed as he was? What references could he give?As he was reflecting in this wise, his eyes fell upon an immenseplacard which a sort of clown was carrying through the streets. Thisplacard, which was in English, read as follows:ACROBATIC JAPANESE TROUPE,HONOURABLE WILLIAM BATULCAR, PROPRIETOR,LAST REPRESENTATIONS,PRIOR TO THEIR DEPARTURE TO THE UNITED STATES,OF THELONG NOSES! LONG NOSES!UNDER THE DIRECT PATRONAGE OF THE GOD TINGOU!GREAT ATTRACTION!“The United States!” said Passepartout; “that’s just what I want!”He followed the clown, and soon found himself once more in the Japanesequarter. A quarter of an hour later he stopped before a large cabin,adorned with several clusters of streamers, the exterior walls of whichwere designed to represent, in violent colours and without perspective,a company of jugglers.This was the Honourable William Batulcar’s establishment. Thatgentleman was a sort of Barnum, the director of a troupe ofmountebanks, jugglers, clowns, acrobats, equilibrists, and gymnasts,who, according to the placard, was giving his last performances beforeleaving the Empire of the Sun for the States of the Union.Passepartout entered and asked for Mr. Batulcar, who straightwayappeared in person.“What do you want?” said he to Passepartout, whom he at first took fora native.“Would you like a servant, sir?” asked Passepartout.“A servant!” cried Mr. Batulcar, caressing the thick grey beard whichhung from his chin. “I already have two who are obedient and faithful,have never left me, and serve me for their nourishment and here theyare,” added he, holding out his two robust arms, furrowed with veins aslarge as the strings of a bass-viol.“So I can be of no use to you?”“None.”“The devil! I should so like to cross the Pacific with you!”“Ah!” said the Honourable Mr. Batulcar. “You are no more a Japanesethan I am a monkey! Who are you dressed up in that way?”“A man dresses as he can.”“That’s true. You are a Frenchman, aren’t you?”“Yes; a Parisian of Paris.”“Then you ought to know how to make grimaces?”“Why,” replied Passepartout, a little vexed that his nationality shouldcause this question, “we Frenchmen know how to make grimaces, it istrue but not any better than the Americans do.”“True. Well, if I can’t take you as a servant, I can as a clown. Yousee, my friend, in France they exhibit foreign clowns, and in foreignparts French clowns.”“Ah!”“You are pretty strong, eh?”“Especially after a good meal.”“And you can sing?”“Yes,” returned Passepartout, who had formerly been wont to sing in thestreets.“But can you sing standing on your head, with a top spinning on yourleft foot, and a sabre balanced on your right?”“Humph! I think so,” replied Passepartout, recalling the exercises ofhis younger days.“Well, that’s enough,” said the Honourable William Batulcar.The engagement was concluded there and then.Passepartout had at last found something to do. He was engaged to actin the celebrated Japanese troupe. It was not a very dignifiedposition, but within a week he would be on his way to San Francisco.The performance, so noisily announced by the Honourable Mr. Batulcar,was to commence at three o’clock, and soon the deafening instruments ofa Japanese orchestra resounded at the door. Passepartout, though he hadnot been able to study or rehearse a part, was designated to lend theaid of his sturdy shoulders in the great exhibition of the “humanpyramid,” executed by the Long Noses of the god Tingou. This “greatattraction” was to close the performance.Before three o’clock the large shed was invaded by the spectators,comprising Europeans and natives, Chinese and Japanese, men, women andchildren, who precipitated themselves upon the narrow benches and intothe boxes opposite the stage. The musicians took up a position inside,and were vigorously performing on their gongs, tam-tams, flutes, bones,tambourines, and immense drums.The performance was much like all acrobatic displays; but it must beconfessed that the Japanese are the first equilibrists in the world.One, with a fan and some bits of paper, performed the graceful trick ofthe butterflies and the flowers; another traced in the air, with theodorous smoke of his pipe, a series of blue words, which composed acompliment to the audience; while a third juggled with some lightedcandles, which he extinguished successively as they passed his lips,and relit again without interrupting for an instant his juggling.Another reproduced the most singular combinations with a spinning-top;in his hands the revolving tops seemed to be animated with a life oftheir own in their interminable whirling; they ran over pipe-stems, theedges of sabres, wires and even hairs stretched across the stage; theyturned around on the edges of large glasses, crossed bamboo ladders,dispersed into all the corners, and produced strange musical effects bythe combination of their various pitches of tone. The jugglers tossedthem in the air, threw them like shuttlecocks with wooden battledores,and yet they kept on spinning; they put them into their pockets, andtook them out still whirling as before.It is useless to describe the astonishing performances of the acrobatsand gymnasts. The turning on ladders, poles, balls, barrels, &amp;c., wasexecuted with wonderful precision.But the principal attraction was the exhibition of the Long Noses, ashow to which Europe is as yet a stranger.The Long Noses form a peculiar company, under the direct patronage ofthe god Tingou. Attired after the fashion of the Middle Ages, they boreupon their shoulders a splendid pair of wings; but what especiallydistinguished them was the long noses which were fastened to theirfaces, and the uses which they made of them. These noses were made ofbamboo, and were five, six, and even ten feet long, some straight,others curved, some ribboned, and some having imitation warts uponthem. It was upon these appendages, fixed tightly on their real noses,that they performed their gymnastic exercises. A dozen of thesesectaries of Tingou lay flat upon their backs, while others, dressed torepresent lightning-rods, came and frolicked on their noses, jumpingfrom one to another, and performing the most skilful leapings andsomersaults.As a last scene, a “human pyramid” had been announced, in which fiftyLong Noses were to represent the Car of Juggernaut. But, instead offorming a pyramid by mounting each other’s shoulders, the artists wereto group themselves on top of the noses. It happened that the performerwho had hitherto formed the base of the Car had quitted the troupe, andas, to fill this part, only strength and adroitness were necessary,Passepartout had been chosen to take his place.The poor fellow really felt sad when—melancholy reminiscence of hisyouth!—he donned his costume, adorned with vari-coloured wings, andfastened to his natural feature a false nose six feet long. But hecheered up when he thought that this nose was winning him something toeat.He went upon the stage, and took his place beside the rest who were tocompose the base of the Car of Juggernaut. They all stretchedthemselves on the floor, their noses pointing to the ceiling. A secondgroup of artists disposed themselves on these long appendages, then athird above these, then a fourth, until a human monument reaching tothe very cornices of the theatre soon arose on top of the noses. Thiselicited loud applause, in the midst of which the orchestra was juststriking up a deafening air, when the pyramid tottered, the balance waslost, one of the lower noses vanished from the pyramid, and the humanmonument was shattered like a castle built of cards!It was Passepartout’s fault. Abandoning his position, clearing thefootlights without the aid of his wings, and, clambering up to theright-hand gallery, he fell at the feet of one of the spectators,crying, “Ah, my master! my master!”“You here?”“Myself.”“Very well; then let us go to the steamer, young man!”Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Passepartout passed through the lobby of thetheatre to the outside, where they encountered the Honourable Mr.Batulcar, furious with rage. He demanded damages for the “breakage” ofthe pyramid; and Phileas Fogg appeased him by giving him a handful ofbanknotes.At half-past six, the very hour of departure, Mr. Fogg and Aouda,followed by Passepartout, who in his hurry had retained his wings, andnose six feet long, stepped upon the American steamer.CHAPTER XXIV.DURING WHICH MR. FOGG AND PARTY CROSS THE PACIFIC OCEANWhat happened when the pilot-boat came in sight of Shanghai will beeasily guessed. The signals made by the “Tankadere” had been seen bythe captain of the Yokohama steamer, who, espying the flag athalf-mast, had directed his course towards the little craft. PhileasFogg, after paying the stipulated price of his passage to John Busby,and rewarding that worthy with the additional sum of five hundred andfifty pounds, ascended the steamer with Aouda and Fix; and they startedat once for Nagasaki and Yokohama.They reached their destination on the morning of the 14th of November.Phileas Fogg lost no time in going on board the “Carnatic,” where helearned, to Aouda’s great delight—and perhaps to his own, though hebetrayed no emotion—that Passepartout, a Frenchman, had really arrivedon her the day before.The San Francisco steamer was announced to leave that very evening, andit became necessary to find Passepartout, if possible, without delay.Mr. Fogg applied in vain to the French and English consuls, and, afterwandering through the streets a long time, began to despair of findinghis missing servant. Chance, or perhaps a kind of presentiment, at lastled him into the Honourable Mr. Batulcar’s theatre. He certainly wouldnot have recognised Passepartout in the eccentric mountebank’s costume;but the latter, lying on his back, perceived his master in the gallery.He could not help starting, which so changed the position of his noseas to bring the “pyramid” pell-mell upon the stage.All this Passepartout learned from Aouda, who recounted to him what hadtaken place on the voyage from Hong Kong to Shanghai on the“Tankadere,” in company with one Mr. Fix.Passepartout did not change countenance on hearing this name. Hethought that the time had not yet arrived to divulge to his master whathad taken place between the detective and himself; and, in the accounthe gave of his absence, he simply excused himself for having beenovertaken by drunkenness, in smoking opium at a tavern in Hong Kong.Mr. Fogg heard this narrative coldly, without a word; and thenfurnished his man with funds necessary to obtain clothing more inharmony with his position. Within an hour the Frenchman had cut off hisnose and parted with his wings, and retained nothing about him whichrecalled the sectary of the god Tingou.The steamer which was about to depart from Yokohama to San Franciscobelonged to the Pacific Mail Steamship Company, and was named the“General Grant.” She was a large paddle-wheel steamer of two thousandfive hundred tons; well equipped and very fast. The massivewalking-beam rose and fell above the deck; at one end a piston-rodworked up and down; and at the other was a connecting-rod which, inchanging the rectilinear motion to a circular one, was directlyconnected with the shaft of the paddles. The “General Grant” was riggedwith three masts, giving a large capacity for sails, and thusmaterially aiding the steam power. By making twelve miles an hour, shewould cross the ocean in twenty-one days. Phileas Fogg was thereforejustified in hoping that he would reach San Francisco by the 2nd ofDecember, New York by the 11th, and London on the 20th—thus gainingseveral hours on the fatal date of the 21st of December.There was a full complement of passengers on board, among them English,many Americans, a large number of coolies on their way to California,and several East Indian officers, who were spending their vacation inmaking the tour of the world. Nothing of moment happened on the voyage;the steamer, sustained on its large paddles, rolled but little, and the“Pacific” almost justified its name. Mr. Fogg was as calm and taciturnas ever. His young companion felt herself more and more attached to himby other ties than gratitude; his silent but generous nature impressedher more than she thought; and it was almost unconsciously that sheyielded to emotions which did not seem to have the least effect uponher protector. Aouda took the keenest interest in his plans, and becameimpatient at any incident which seemed likely to retard his journey.She often chatted with Passepartout, who did not fail to perceive thestate of the lady’s heart; and, being the most faithful of domestics,he never exhausted his eulogies of Phileas Fogg’s honesty, generosity,and devotion. He took pains to calm Aouda’s doubts of a successfultermination of the journey, telling her that the most difficult part ofit had passed, that now they were beyond the fantastic countries ofJapan and China, and were fairly on their way to civilised placesagain. A railway train from San Francisco to New York, and atransatlantic steamer from New York to Liverpool, would doubtless bringthem to the end of this impossible journey round the world within theperiod agreed upon.On the ninth day after leaving Yokohama, Phileas Fogg had traversedexactly one half of the terrestrial globe. The “General Grant” passed,on the 23rd of November, the one hundred and eightieth meridian, andwas at the very antipodes of London. Mr. Fogg had, it is true,exhausted fifty-two of the eighty days in which he was to complete thetour, and there were only twenty-eight left. But, though he was onlyhalf-way by the difference of meridians, he had really gone overtwo-thirds of the whole journey; for he had been obliged to make longcircuits from London to Aden, from Aden to Bombay, from Calcutta toSingapore, and from Singapore to Yokohama. Could he have followedwithout deviation the fiftieth parallel, which is that of London, thewhole distance would only have been about twelve thousand miles;whereas he would be forced, by the irregular methods of locomotion, totraverse twenty-six thousand, of which he had, on the 23rd of November,accomplished seventeen thousand five hundred. And now the course was astraight one, and Fix was no longer there to put obstacles in theirway!It happened also, on the 23rd of November, that Passepartout made ajoyful discovery. It will be remembered that the obstinate fellow hadinsisted on keeping his famous family watch at London time, and onregarding that of the countries he had passed through as quite falseand unreliable. Now, on this day, though he had not changed the hands,he found that his watch exactly agreed with the ship’s chronometers.His triumph was hilarious. He would have liked to know what Fix wouldsay if he were aboard!“The rogue told me a lot of stories,” repeated Passepartout, “about themeridians, the sun, and the moon! Moon, indeed! moonshine more likely!If one listened to that sort of people, a pretty sort of time one wouldkeep! I was sure that the sun would some day regulate itself by mywatch!”Passepartout was ignorant that, if the face of his watch had beendivided into twenty-four hours, like the Italian clocks, he would haveno reason for exultation; for the hands of his watch would then,instead of as now indicating nine o’clock in the morning, indicate nineo’clock in the evening, that is, the twenty-first hour after midnightprecisely the difference between London time and that of the onehundred and eightieth meridian. But if Fix had been able to explainthis purely physical effect, Passepartout would not have admitted, evenif he had comprehended it. Moreover, if the detective had been on boardat that moment, Passepartout would have joined issue with him on aquite different subject, and in an entirely different manner.Where was Fix at that moment?He was actually on board the “General Grant.”On reaching Yokohama, the detective, leaving Mr. Fogg, whom he expectedto meet again during the day, had repaired at once to the Englishconsulate, where he at last found the warrant of arrest. It hadfollowed him from Bombay, and had come by the “Carnatic,” on whichsteamer he himself was supposed to be. Fix’s disappointment may beimagined when he reflected that the warrant was now useless. Mr. Fogghad left English ground, and it was now necessary to procure hisextradition!“Well,” thought Fix, after a moment of anger, “my warrant is not goodhere, but it will be in England. The rogue evidently intends to returnto his own country, thinking he has thrown the police off his track.Good! I will follow him across the Atlantic. As for the money, heavengrant there may be some left! But the fellow has already spent intravelling, rewards, trials, bail, elephants, and all sorts of charges,more than five thousand pounds. Yet, after all, the Bank is rich!”His course decided on, he went on board the “General Grant,” and wasthere when Mr. Fogg and Aouda arrived. To his utter amazement, herecognised Passepartout, despite his theatrical disguise. He quicklyconcealed himself in his cabin, to avoid an awkward explanation, andhoped—thanks to the number of passengers—to remain unperceived by Mr.Fogg’s servant.On that very day, however, he met Passepartout face to face on theforward deck. The latter, without a word, made a rush for him, graspedhim by the throat, and, much to the amusement of a group of Americans,who immediately began to bet on him, administered to the detective aperfect volley of blows, which proved the great superiority of Frenchover English pugilistic skill.When Passepartout had finished, he found himself relieved andcomforted. Fix got up in a somewhat rumpled condition, and, looking athis adversary, coldly said, “Have you done?”“For this time—yes.”“Then let me have a word with you.”“But I—”“In your master’s interests.”Passepartout seemed to be vanquished by Fix’s coolness, for he quietlyfollowed him, and they sat down aside from the rest of the passengers.“You have given me a thrashing,” said Fix. “Good, I expected it. Now,listen to me. Up to this time I have been Mr. Fogg’s adversary. I amnow in his game.”“Aha!” cried Passepartout; “you are convinced he is an honest man?”“No,” replied Fix coldly, “I think him a rascal. Sh! don’t budge, andlet me speak. As long as Mr. Fogg was on English ground, it was for myinterest to detain him there until my warrant of arrest arrived. I dideverything I could to keep him back. I sent the Bombay priests afterhim, I got you intoxicated at Hong Kong, I separated you from him, andI made him miss the Yokohama steamer.”Passepartout listened, with closed fists.“Now,” resumed Fix, “Mr. Fogg seems to be going back to England. Well,I will follow him there. But hereafter I will do as much to keepobstacles out of his way as I have done up to this time to put them inhis path. I’ve changed my game, you see, and simply because it was formy interest to change it. Your interest is the same as mine; for it isonly in England that you will ascertain whether you are in the serviceof a criminal or an honest man.”Passepartout listened very attentively to Fix, and was convinced thathe spoke with entire good faith.“Are we friends?” asked the detective.“Friends?—no,” replied Passepartout; “but allies, perhaps. At the leastsign of treason, however, I’ll twist your neck for you.”“Agreed,” said the detective quietly.Eleven days later, on the 3rd of December, the “General Grant” enteredthe bay of the Golden Gate, and reached San Francisco.Mr. Fogg had neither gained nor lost a single day.CHAPTER XXV.IN WHICH A SLIGHT GLIMPSE IS HAD OF SAN FRANCISCOIt was seven in the morning when Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Passepartout setfoot upon the American continent, if this name can be given to thefloating quay upon which they disembarked. These quays, rising andfalling with the tide, thus facilitate the loading and unloading ofvessels. Alongside them were clippers of all sizes, steamers of allnationalities, and the steamboats, with several decks rising one abovethe other, which ply on the Sacramento and its tributaries. There werealso heaped up the products of a commerce which extends to Mexico,Chili, Peru, Brazil, Europe, Asia, and all the Pacific islands.Passepartout, in his joy on reaching at last the American continent,thought he would manifest it by executing a perilous vault in finestyle; but, tumbling upon some worm-eaten planks, he fell through them.Put out of countenance by the manner in which he thus “set foot” uponthe New World, he uttered a loud cry, which so frightened theinnumerable cormorants and pelicans that are always perched upon thesemovable quays, that they flew noisily away.Mr. Fogg, on reaching shore, proceeded to find out at what hour thefirst train left for New York, and learned that this was at six o’clockp.m.; he had, therefore, an entire day to spend in the Californiancapital. Taking a carriage at a charge of three dollars, he and Aoudaentered it, while Passepartout mounted the box beside the driver, andthey set out for the International Hotel.From his exalted position Passepartout observed with much curiosity thewide streets, the low, evenly ranged houses, the Anglo-Saxon Gothicchurches, the great docks, the palatial wooden and brick warehouses,the numerous conveyances, omnibuses, horse-cars, and upon theside-walks, not only Americans and Europeans, but Chinese and Indians.Passepartout was surprised at all he saw. San Francisco was no longerthe legendary city of 1849—a city of banditti, assassins, andincendiaries, who had flocked hither in crowds in pursuit of plunder; aparadise of outlaws, where they gambled with gold-dust, a revolver inone hand and a bowie-knife in the other: it was now a great commercialemporium.The lofty tower of its City Hall overlooked the whole panorama of thestreets and avenues, which cut each other at right-angles, and in themidst of which appeared pleasant, verdant squares, while beyondappeared the Chinese quarter, seemingly imported from the CelestialEmpire in a toy-box. Sombreros and red shirts and plumed Indians wererarely to be seen; but there were silk hats and black coats everywhereworn by a multitude of nervously active, gentlemanly-looking men. Someof the streets—especially Montgomery Street, which is to San Franciscowhat Regent Street is to London, the Boulevard des Italiens to Paris,and Broadway to New York—were lined with splendid and spacious stores,which exposed in their windows the products of the entire world.When Passepartout reached the International Hotel, it did not seem tohim as if he had left England at all.The ground floor of the hotel was occupied by a large bar, a sort ofrestaurant freely open to all passers-by, who might partake of driedbeef, oyster soup, biscuits, and cheese, without taking out theirpurses. Payment was made only for the ale, porter, or sherry which wasdrunk. This seemed “very American” to Passepartout. The hotelrefreshment-rooms were comfortable, and Mr. Fogg and Aouda, installingthemselves at a table, were abundantly served on diminutive plates bynegroes of darkest hue.After breakfast, Mr. Fogg, accompanied by Aouda, started for theEnglish consulate to have his passport _visaed_. As he was going out,he met Passepartout, who asked him if it would not be well, beforetaking the train, to purchase some dozens of Enfield rifles and Colt’srevolvers. He had been listening to stories of attacks upon the trainsby the Sioux and Pawnees. Mr. Fogg thought it a useless precaution, buttold him to do as he thought best, and went on to the consulate.He had not proceeded two hundred steps, however, when, “by the greatestchance in the world,” he met Fix. The detective seemed wholly taken bysurprise. What! Had Mr. Fogg and himself crossed the Pacific together,and not met on the steamer! At least Fix felt honoured to behold oncemore the gentleman to whom he owed so much, and, as his businessrecalled him to Europe, he should be delighted to continue the journeyin such pleasant company.Mr. Fogg replied that the honour would be his; and the detective—whowas determined not to lose sight of him—begged permission to accompanythem in their walk about San Francisco—a request which Mr. Fogg readilygranted.They soon found themselves in Montgomery Street, where a great crowdwas collected; the side-walks, street, horsecar rails, the shop-doors,the windows of the houses, and even the roofs, were full of people. Menwere going about carrying large posters, and flags and streamers werefloating in the wind; while loud cries were heard on every hand.“Hurrah for Camerfield!”“Hurrah for Mandiboy!”It was a political meeting; at least so Fix conjectured, who said toMr. Fogg, “Perhaps we had better not mingle with the crowd. There maybe danger in it.”“Yes,” returned Mr. Fogg; “and blows, even if they are political, arestill blows.”Fix smiled at this remark; and, in order to be able to see withoutbeing jostled about, the party took up a position on the top of aflight of steps situated at the upper end of Montgomery Street.Opposite them, on the other side of the street, between a coal wharfand a petroleum warehouse, a large platform had been erected in theopen air, towards which the current of the crowd seemed to be directed.For what purpose was this meeting? What was the occasion of thisexcited assemblage? Phileas Fogg could not imagine. Was it to nominatesome high official—a governor or member of Congress? It was notimprobable, so agitated was the multitude before them.Just at this moment there was an unusual stir in the human mass. Allthe hands were raised in the air. Some, tightly closed, seemed todisappear suddenly in the midst of the cries—an energetic way, nodoubt, of casting a vote. The crowd swayed back, the banners and flagswavered, disappeared an instant, then reappeared in tatters. Theundulations of the human surge reached the steps, while all the headsfloundered on the surface like a sea agitated by a squall. Many of theblack hats disappeared, and the greater part of the crowd seemed tohave diminished in height.“It is evidently a meeting,” said Fix, “and its object must be anexciting one. I should not wonder if it were about the ‘Alabama,’despite the fact that that question is settled.”“Perhaps,” replied Mr. Fogg, simply.“At least, there are two champions in presence of each other, theHonourable Mr. Camerfield and the Honourable Mr. Mandiboy.”Aouda, leaning upon Mr. Fogg’s arm, observed the tumultuous scene withsurprise, while Fix asked a man near him what the cause of it all was.Before the man could reply, a fresh agitation arose; hurrahs andexcited shouts were heard; the staffs of the banners began to be usedas offensive weapons; and fists flew about in every direction. Thumpswere exchanged from the tops of the carriages and omnibuses which hadbeen blocked up in the crowd. Boots and shoes went whirling through theair, and Mr. Fogg thought he even heard the crack of revolvers minglingin the din, the rout approached the stairway, and flowed over the lowerstep. One of the parties had evidently been repulsed; but the merelookers-on could not tell whether Mandiboy or Camerfield had gained theupper hand.“It would be prudent for us to retire,” said Fix, who was anxious thatMr. Fogg should not receive any injury, at least until they got back toLondon. “If there is any question about England in all this, and wewere recognised, I fear it would go hard with us.”“An English subject—” began Mr. Fogg.He did not finish his sentence; for a terrific hubbub now arose on theterrace behind the flight of steps where they stood, and there werefrantic shouts of, “Hurrah for Mandiboy! Hip, hip, hurrah!”It was a band of voters coming to the rescue of their allies, andtaking the Camerfield forces in flank. Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Fix foundthemselves between two fires; it was too late to escape. The torrent ofmen, armed with loaded canes and sticks, was irresistible. Phileas Foggand Fix were roughly hustled in their attempts to protect their faircompanion; the former, as cool as ever, tried to defend himself withthe weapons which nature has placed at the end of every Englishman’sarm, but in vain. A big brawny fellow with a red beard, flushed face,and broad shoulders, who seemed to be the chief of the band, raised hisclenched fist to strike Mr. Fogg, whom he would have given a crushingblow, had not Fix rushed in and received it in his stead. An enormousbruise immediately made its appearance under the detective’s silk hat,which was completely smashed in.“Yankee!” exclaimed Mr. Fogg, darting a contemptuous look at theruffian.“Englishman!” returned the other. “We will meet again!”“When you please.”“What is your name?”“Phileas Fogg. And yours?”“Colonel Stamp Proctor.”The human tide now swept by, after overturning Fix, who speedily gotupon his feet again, though with tattered clothes. Happily, he was notseriously hurt. His travelling overcoat was divided into two unequalparts, and his trousers resembled those of certain Indians, which fitless compactly than they are easy to put on. Aouda had escapedunharmed, and Fix alone bore marks of the fray in his black and bluebruise.“Thanks,” said Mr. Fogg to the detective, as soon as they were out ofthe crowd.“No thanks are necessary,” replied Fix; “but let us go.”“Where?”“To a tailor’s.”Such a visit was, indeed, opportune. The clothing of both Mr. Fogg andFix was in rags, as if they had themselves been actively engaged in thecontest between Camerfield and Mandiboy. An hour after, they were oncemore suitably attired, and with Aouda returned to the InternationalHotel.Passepartout was waiting for his master, armed with half a dozensix-barrelled revolvers. When he perceived Fix, he knit his brows; butAouda having, in a few words, told him of their adventure, hiscountenance resumed its placid expression. Fix evidently was no longeran enemy, but an ally; he was faithfully keeping his word.Dinner over, the coach which was to convey the passengers and theirluggage to the station drew up to the door. As he was getting in, Mr.Fogg said to Fix, “You have not seen this Colonel Proctor again?”“No.”“I will come back to America to find him,” said Phileas Fogg calmly.“It would not be right for an Englishman to permit himself to betreated in that way, without retaliating.”The detective smiled, but did not reply. It was clear that Mr. Fogg wasone of those Englishmen who, while they do not tolerate duelling athome, fight abroad when their honour is attacked.At a quarter before six the travellers reached the station, and foundthe train ready to depart. As he was about to enter it, Mr. Fogg calleda porter, and said to him: “My friend, was there not some troubleto-day in San Francisco?”“It was a political meeting, sir,” replied the porter.“But I thought there was a great deal of disturbance in the streets.”“It was only a meeting assembled for an election.”“The election of a general-in-chief, no doubt?” asked Mr. Fogg.“No, sir; of a justice of the peace.”Phileas Fogg got into the train, which started off at full speed.CHAPTER XXVI.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND PARTY TRAVEL BY THE PACIFIC RAILROAD“From ocean to ocean”—so say the Americans; and these four wordscompose the general designation of the “great trunk line” which crossesthe entire width of the United States. The Pacific Railroad is,however, really divided into two distinct lines: the Central Pacific,between San Francisco and Ogden, and the Union Pacific, between Ogdenand Omaha. Five main lines connect Omaha with New York.New York and San Francisco are thus united by an uninterrupted metalribbon, which measures no less than three thousand seven hundred andeighty-six miles. Between Omaha and the Pacific the railway crosses aterritory which is still infested by Indians and wild beasts, and alarge tract which the Mormons, after they were driven from Illinois in1845, began to colonise.The journey from New York to San Francisco consumed, formerly, underthe most favourable conditions, at least six months. It is nowaccomplished in seven days.It was in 1862 that, in spite of the Southern Members of Congress, whowished a more southerly route, it was decided to lay the road betweenthe forty-first and forty-second parallels. President Lincoln himselffixed the end of the line at Omaha, in Nebraska. The work was at oncecommenced, and pursued with true American energy; nor did the rapiditywith which it went on injuriously affect its good execution. The roadgrew, on the prairies, a mile and a half a day. A locomotive, runningon the rails laid down the evening before, brought the rails to be laidon the morrow, and advanced upon them as fast as they were put inposition.The Pacific Railroad is joined by several branches in Iowa, Kansas,Colorado, and Oregon. On leaving Omaha, it passes along the left bankof the Platte River as far as the junction of its northern branch,follows its southern branch, crosses the Laramie territory and theWahsatch Mountains, turns the Great Salt Lake, and reaches Salt LakeCity, the Mormon capital, plunges into the Tuilla Valley, across theAmerican Desert, Cedar and Humboldt Mountains, the Sierra Nevada, anddescends, _viâ_ Sacramento, to the Pacific—its grade, even on the RockyMountains, never exceeding one hundred and twelve feet to the mile.Such was the road to be traversed in seven days, which would enablePhileas Fogg—at least, so he hoped—to take the Atlantic steamer at NewYork on the 11th for Liverpool.The car which he occupied was a sort of long omnibus on eight wheels,and with no compartments in the interior. It was supplied with two rowsof seats, perpendicular to the direction of the train on either side ofan aisle which conducted to the front and rear platforms. Theseplatforms were found throughout the train, and the passengers were ableto pass from one end of the train to the other. It was supplied withsaloon cars, balcony cars, restaurants, and smoking-cars; theatre carsalone were wanting, and they will have these some day.Book and news dealers, sellers of edibles, drinkables, and cigars, whoseemed to have plenty of customers, were continually circulating in theaisles.The train left Oakland station at six o’clock. It was already night,cold and cheerless, the heavens being overcast with clouds which seemedto threaten snow. The train did not proceed rapidly; counting thestoppages, it did not run more than twenty miles an hour, which was asufficient speed, however, to enable it to reach Omaha within itsdesignated time.There was but little conversation in the car, and soon many of thepassengers were overcome with sleep. Passepartout found himself besidethe detective; but he did not talk to him. After recent events, theirrelations with each other had grown somewhat cold; there could nolonger be mutual sympathy or intimacy between them. Fix’s manner hadnot changed; but Passepartout was very reserved, and ready to stranglehis former friend on the slightest provocation.Snow began to fall an hour after they started, a fine snow, however,which happily could not obstruct the train; nothing could be seen fromthe windows but a vast, white sheet, against which the smoke of thelocomotive had a greyish aspect.At eight o’clock a steward entered the car and announced that the timefor going to bed had arrived; and in a few minutes the car wastransformed into a dormitory. The backs of the seats were thrown back,bedsteads carefully packed were rolled out by an ingenious system,berths were suddenly improvised, and each traveller had soon at hisdisposition a comfortable bed, protected from curious eyes by thickcurtains. The sheets were clean and the pillows soft. It only remainedto go to bed and sleep which everybody did—while the train sped onacross the State of California.The country between San Francisco and Sacramento is not very hilly. TheCentral Pacific, taking Sacramento for its starting-point, extendseastward to meet the road from Omaha. The line from San Francisco toSacramento runs in a north-easterly direction, along the AmericanRiver, which empties into San Pablo Bay. The one hundred and twentymiles between these cities were accomplished in six hours, and towardsmidnight, while fast asleep, the travellers passed through Sacramento;so that they saw nothing of that important place, the seat of the Stategovernment, with its fine quays, its broad streets, its noble hotels,squares, and churches.The train, on leaving Sacramento, and passing the junction, Roclin,Auburn, and Colfax, entered the range of the Sierra Nevada. ’Cisco wasreached at seven in the morning; and an hour later the dormitory wastransformed into an ordinary car, and the travellers could observe thepicturesque beauties of the mountain region through which they weresteaming. The railway track wound in and out among the passes, nowapproaching the mountain-sides, now suspended over precipices, avoidingabrupt angles by bold curves, plunging into narrow defiles, whichseemed to have no outlet. The locomotive, its great funnel emitting aweird light, with its sharp bell, and its cow-catcher extended like aspur, mingled its shrieks and bellowings with the noise of torrents andcascades, and twined its smoke among the branches of the giganticpines.There were few or no bridges or tunnels on the route. The railwayturned around the sides of the mountains, and did not attempt toviolate nature by taking the shortest cut from one point to another.The train entered the State of Nevada through the Carson Valley aboutnine o’clock, going always northeasterly; and at midday reached Reno,where there was a delay of twenty minutes for breakfast.From this point the road, running along Humboldt River, passednorthward for several miles by its banks; then it turned eastward, andkept by the river until it reached the Humboldt Range, nearly at theextreme eastern limit of Nevada.Having breakfasted, Mr. Fogg and his companions resumed their places inthe car, and observed the varied landscape which unfolded itself asthey passed along the vast prairies, the mountains lining the horizon,and the creeks, with their frothy, foaming streams. Sometimes a greatherd of buffaloes, massing together in the distance, seemed like amoveable dam. These innumerable multitudes of ruminating beasts oftenform an insurmountable obstacle to the passage of the trains; thousandsof them have been seen passing over the track for hours together, incompact ranks. The locomotive is then forced to stop and wait till theroad is once more clear.This happened, indeed, to the train in which Mr. Fogg was travelling.About twelve o’clock a troop of ten or twelve thousand head of buffaloencumbered the track. The locomotive, slackening its speed, tried toclear the way with its cow-catcher; but the mass of animals was toogreat. The buffaloes marched along with a tranquil gait, uttering nowand then deafening bellowings. There was no use of interrupting them,for, having taken a particular direction, nothing can moderate andchange their course; it is a torrent of living flesh which no dam couldcontain.The travellers gazed on this curious spectacle from the platforms; butPhileas Fogg, who had the most reason of all to be in a hurry, remainedin his seat, and waited philosophically until it should please thebuffaloes to get out of the way.Passepartout was furious at the delay they occasioned, and longed todischarge his arsenal of revolvers upon them.“What a country!” cried he. “Mere cattle stop the trains, and go by ina procession, just as if they were not impeding travel! Parbleu! Ishould like to know if Mr. Fogg foresaw _this_ mishap in his programme!And here’s an engineer who doesn’t dare to run the locomotive into thisherd of beasts!”The engineer did not try to overcome the obstacle, and he was wise. Hewould have crushed the first buffaloes, no doubt, with the cow-catcher;but the locomotive, however powerful, would soon have been checked, thetrain would inevitably have been thrown off the track, and would thenhave been helpless.The best course was to wait patiently, and regain the lost time bygreater speed when the obstacle was removed. The procession ofbuffaloes lasted three full hours, and it was night before the trackwas clear. The last ranks of the herd were now passing over the rails,while the first had already disappeared below the southern horizon.It was eight o’clock when the train passed through the defiles of theHumboldt Range, and half-past nine when it penetrated Utah, the regionof the Great Salt Lake, the singular colony of the Mormons.CHAPTER XXVII.IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT UNDERGOES, AT A SPEED OF TWENTY MILES AN HOUR, ACOURSE OF MORMON HISTORYDuring the night of the 5th of December, the train ran south-easterlyfor about fifty miles; then rose an equal distance in a north-easterlydirection, towards the Great Salt Lake.Passepartout, about nine o’clock, went out upon the platform to takethe air. The weather was cold, the heavens grey, but it was notsnowing. The sun’s disc, enlarged by the mist, seemed an enormous ringof gold, and Passepartout was amusing himself by calculating its valuein pounds sterling, when he was diverted from this interesting study bya strange-looking personage who made his appearance on the platform.This personage, who had taken the train at Elko, was tall and dark,with black moustache, black stockings, a black silk hat, a blackwaistcoat, black trousers, a white cravat, and dogskin gloves. He mighthave been taken for a clergyman. He went from one end of the train tothe other, and affixed to the door of each car a notice written inmanuscript.Passepartout approached and read one of these notices, which statedthat Elder William Hitch, Mormon missionary, taking advantage of hispresence on train No. 48, would deliver a lecture on Mormonism in carNo. 117, from eleven to twelve o’clock; and that he invited all whowere desirous of being instructed concerning the mysteries of thereligion of the “Latter Day Saints” to attend.“I’ll go,” said Passepartout to himself. He knew nothing of Mormonismexcept the custom of polygamy, which is its foundation.The news quickly spread through the train, which contained about onehundred passengers, thirty of whom, at most, attracted by the notice,ensconced themselves in car No. 117. Passepartout took one of the frontseats. Neither Mr. Fogg nor Fix cared to attend.At the appointed hour Elder William Hitch rose, and, in an irritatedvoice, as if he had already been contradicted, said, “I tell you thatJoe Smith is a martyr, that his brother Hiram is a martyr, and that thepersecutions of the United States Government against the prophets willalso make a martyr of Brigham Young. Who dares to say the contrary?”No one ventured to gainsay the missionary, whose excited tonecontrasted curiously with his naturally calm visage. No doubt his angerarose from the hardships to which the Mormons were actually subjected.The government had just succeeded, with some difficulty, in reducingthese independent fanatics to its rule. It had made itself master ofUtah, and subjected that territory to the laws of the Union, afterimprisoning Brigham Young on a charge of rebellion and polygamy. Thedisciples of the prophet had since redoubled their efforts, andresisted, by words at least, the authority of Congress. Elder Hitch, asis seen, was trying to make proselytes on the very railway trains.Then, emphasising his words with his loud voice and frequent gestures,he related the history of the Mormons from Biblical times: how that, inIsrael, a Mormon prophet of the tribe of Joseph published the annals ofthe new religion, and bequeathed them to his son Mormon; how, manycenturies later, a translation of this precious book, which was writtenin Egyptian, was made by Joseph Smith, junior, a Vermont farmer, whorevealed himself as a mystical prophet in 1825; and how, in short, thecelestial messenger appeared to him in an illuminated forest, and gavehim the annals of the Lord.Several of the audience, not being much interested in the missionary’snarrative, here left the car; but Elder Hitch, continuing his lecture,related how Smith, junior, with his father, two brothers, and a fewdisciples, founded the church of the “Latter Day Saints,” which,adopted not only in America, but in England, Norway and Sweden, andGermany, counts many artisans, as well as men engaged in the liberalprofessions, among its members; how a colony was established in Ohio, atemple erected there at a cost of two hundred thousand dollars, and atown built at Kirkland; how Smith became an enterprising banker, andreceived from a simple mummy showman a papyrus scroll written byAbraham and several famous Egyptians.The Elder’s story became somewhat wearisome, and his audience grewgradually less, until it was reduced to twenty passengers. But this didnot disconcert the enthusiast, who proceeded with the story of JosephSmith’s bankruptcy in 1837, and how his ruined creditors gave him acoat of tar and feathers; his reappearance some years afterwards, morehonourable and honoured than ever, at Independence, Missouri, the chiefof a flourishing colony of three thousand disciples, and his pursuitthence by outraged Gentiles, and retirement into the Far West.Ten hearers only were now left, among them honest Passepartout, who waslistening with all his ears. Thus he learned that, after longpersecutions, Smith reappeared in Illinois, and in 1839 founded acommunity at Nauvoo, on the Mississippi, numbering twenty-five thousandsouls, of which he became mayor, chief justice, and general-in-chief;that he announced himself, in 1843, as a candidate for the Presidencyof the United States; and that finally, being drawn into ambuscade atCarthage, he was thrown into prison, and assassinated by a band of mendisguised in masks.Passepartout was now the only person left in the car, and the Elder,looking him full in the face, reminded him that, two years after theassassination of Joseph Smith, the inspired prophet, Brigham Young, hissuccessor, left Nauvoo for the banks of the Great Salt Lake, where, inthe midst of that fertile region, directly on the route of theemigrants who crossed Utah on their way to California, the new colony,thanks to the polygamy practised by the Mormons, had flourished beyondexpectations.“And this,” added Elder William Hitch, “this is why the jealousy ofCongress has been aroused against us! Why have the soldiers of theUnion invaded the soil of Utah? Why has Brigham Young, our chief, beenimprisoned, in contempt of all justice? Shall we yield to force? Never!Driven from Vermont, driven from Illinois, driven from Ohio, drivenfrom Missouri, driven from Utah, we shall yet find some independentterritory on which to plant our tents. And you, my brother,” continuedthe Elder, fixing his angry eyes upon his single auditor, “will you notplant yours there, too, under the shadow of our flag?”“No!” replied Passepartout courageously, in his turn retiring from thecar, and leaving the Elder to preach to vacancy.During the lecture the train had been making good progress, and towardshalf-past twelve it reached the northwest border of the Great SaltLake. Thence the passengers could observe the vast extent of thisinterior sea, which is also called the Dead Sea, and into which flowsan American Jordan. It is a picturesque expanse, framed in lofty cragsin large strata, encrusted with white salt—a superb sheet of water,which was formerly of larger extent than now, its shores havingencroached with the lapse of time, and thus at once reduced its breadthand increased its depth.The Salt Lake, seventy miles long and thirty-five wide, is situatedthree miles eight hundred feet above the sea. Quite different from LakeAsphaltite, whose depression is twelve hundred feet below the sea, itcontains considerable salt, and one quarter of the weight of its wateris solid matter, its specific weight being 1,170, and, after beingdistilled, 1,000. Fishes are, of course, unable to live in it, andthose which descend through the Jordan, the Weber, and other streamssoon perish.The country around the lake was well cultivated, for the Mormons aremostly farmers; while ranches and pens for domesticated animals, fieldsof wheat, corn, and other cereals, luxuriant prairies, hedges of wildrose, clumps of acacias and milk-wort, would have been seen six monthslater. Now the ground was covered with a thin powdering of snow.The train reached Ogden at two o’clock, where it rested for six hours,Mr. Fogg and his party had time to pay a visit to Salt Lake City,connected with Ogden by a branch road; and they spent two hours in thisstrikingly American town, built on the pattern of other cities of theUnion, like a checker-board, “with the sombre sadness of right-angles,”as Victor Hugo expresses it. The founder of the City of the Saintscould not escape from the taste for symmetry which distinguishes theAnglo-Saxons. In this strange country, where the people are certainlynot up to the level of their institutions, everything is done“squarely”—cities, houses, and follies.The travellers, then, were promenading, at three o’clock, about thestreets of the town built between the banks of the Jordan and the spursof the Wahsatch Range. They saw few or no churches, but the prophet’smansion, the court-house, and the arsenal, blue-brick houses withverandas and porches, surrounded by gardens bordered with acacias,palms, and locusts. A clay and pebble wall, built in 1853, surroundedthe town; and in the principal street were the market and severalhotels adorned with pavilions. The place did not seem thicklypopulated. The streets were almost deserted, except in the vicinity ofthe temple, which they only reached after having traversed severalquarters surrounded by palisades. There were many women, which waseasily accounted for by the “peculiar institution” of the Mormons; butit must not be supposed that all the Mormons are polygamists. They arefree to marry or not, as they please; but it is worth noting that it ismainly the female citizens of Utah who are anxious to marry, as,according to the Mormon religion, maiden ladies are not admitted to thepossession of its highest joys. These poor creatures seemed to beneither well off nor happy. Some—the more well-to-do, no doubt—woreshort, open, black silk dresses, under a hood or modest shawl; otherswere habited in Indian fashion.Passepartout could not behold without a certain fright these women,charged, in groups, with conferring happiness on a single Mormon. Hiscommon sense pitied, above all, the husband. It seemed to him aterrible thing to have to guide so many wives at once across thevicissitudes of life, and to conduct them, as it were, in a body to theMormon paradise with the prospect of seeing them in the company of theglorious Smith, who doubtless was the chief ornament of that delightfulplace, to all eternity. He felt decidedly repelled from such avocation, and he imagined—perhaps he was mistaken—that the fair ones ofSalt Lake City cast rather alarming glances on his person. Happily, hisstay there was but brief. At four the party found themselves again atthe station, took their places in the train, and the whistle soundedfor starting. Just at the moment, however, that the locomotive wheelsbegan to move, cries of “Stop! stop!” were heard.Trains, like time and tide, stop for no one. The gentleman who utteredthe cries was evidently a belated Mormon. He was breathless withrunning. Happily for him, the station had neither gates nor barriers.He rushed along the track, jumped on the rear platform of the train,and fell, exhausted, into one of the seats.Passepartout, who had been anxiously watching this amateur gymnast,approached him with lively interest, and learned that he had takenflight after an unpleasant domestic scene.When the Mormon had recovered his breath, Passepartout ventured to askhim politely how many wives he had; for, from the manner in which hehad decamped, it might be thought that he had twenty at least.“One, sir,” replied the Mormon, raising his arms heavenward —“one, andthat was enough!”CHAPTER XXVIII.IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT DOES NOT SUCCEED IN MAKING ANYBODY LISTEN TOREASONThe train, on leaving Great Salt Lake at Ogden, passed northward for anhour as far as Weber River, having completed nearly nine hundred milesfrom San Francisco. From this point it took an easterly directiontowards the jagged Wahsatch Mountains. It was in the section includedbetween this range and the Rocky Mountains that the American engineersfound the most formidable difficulties in laying the road, and that thegovernment granted a subsidy of forty-eight thousand dollars per mile,instead of sixteen thousand allowed for the work done on the plains.But the engineers, instead of violating nature, avoided itsdifficulties by winding around, instead of penetrating the rocks. Onetunnel only, fourteen thousand feet in length, was pierced in order toarrive at the great basin.The track up to this time had reached its highest elevation at theGreat Salt Lake. From this point it described a long curve, descendingtowards Bitter Creek Valley, to rise again to the dividing ridge of thewaters between the Atlantic and the Pacific. There were many creeks inthis mountainous region, and it was necessary to cross Muddy Creek,Green Creek, and others, upon culverts.Passepartout grew more and more impatient as they went on, while Fixlonged to get out of this difficult region, and was more anxious thanPhileas Fogg himself to be beyond the danger of delays and accidents,and set foot on English soil.At ten o’clock at night the train stopped at Fort Bridger station, andtwenty minutes later entered Wyoming Territory, following the valley ofBitter Creek throughout. The next day, 7th December, they stopped for aquarter of an hour at Green River station. Snow had fallen abundantlyduring the night, but, being mixed with rain, it had half melted, anddid not interrupt their progress. The bad weather, however, annoyedPassepartout; for the accumulation of snow, by blocking the wheels ofthe cars, would certainly have been fatal to Mr. Fogg’s tour.“What an idea!” he said to himself. “Why did my master make thisjourney in winter? Couldn’t he have waited for the good season toincrease his chances?”While the worthy Frenchman was absorbed in the state of the sky and thedepression of the temperature, Aouda was experiencing fears from atotally different cause.Several passengers had got off at Green River, and were walking up anddown the platforms; and among these Aouda recognised Colonel StampProctor, the same who had so grossly insulted Phileas Fogg at the SanFrancisco meeting. Not wishing to be recognised, the young woman drewback from the window, feeling much alarm at her discovery. She wasattached to the man who, however coldly, gave her daily evidences ofthe most absolute devotion. She did not comprehend, perhaps, the depthof the sentiment with which her protector inspired her, which shecalled gratitude, but which, though she was unconscious of it, wasreally more than that. Her heart sank within her when she recognisedthe man whom Mr. Fogg desired, sooner or later, to call to account forhis conduct. Chance alone, it was clear, had brought Colonel Proctor onthis train; but there he was, and it was necessary, at all hazards,that Phileas Fogg should not perceive his adversary.Aouda seized a moment when Mr. Fogg was asleep to tell Fix andPassepartout whom she had seen.“That Proctor on this train!” cried Fix. “Well, reassure yourself,madam; before he settles with Mr. Fogg; he has got to deal with me! Itseems to me that I was the more insulted of the two.”“And, besides,” added Passepartout, “I’ll take charge of him, colonelas he is.”“Mr. Fix,” resumed Aouda, “Mr. Fogg will allow no one to avenge him. Hesaid that he would come back to America to find this man. Should heperceive Colonel Proctor, we could not prevent a collision which mighthave terrible results. He must not see him.”“You are right, madam,” replied Fix; “a meeting between them might ruinall. Whether he were victorious or beaten, Mr. Fogg would be delayed,and—”“And,” added Passepartout, “that would play the game of the gentlemenof the Reform Club. In four days we shall be in New York. Well, if mymaster does not leave this car during those four days, we may hope thatchance will not bring him face to face with this confounded American.We must, if possible, prevent his stirring out of it.”The conversation dropped. Mr. Fogg had just woke up, and was lookingout of the window. Soon after Passepartout, without being heard by hismaster or Aouda, whispered to the detective, “Would you really fightfor him?”“I would do anything,” replied Fix, in a tone which betrayed determinedwill, “to get him back living to Europe!”Passepartout felt something like a shudder shoot through his frame, buthis confidence in his master remained unbroken.Was there any means of detaining Mr. Fogg in the car, to avoid ameeting between him and the colonel? It ought not to be a difficulttask, since that gentleman was naturally sedentary and little curious.The detective, at least, seemed to have found a way; for, after a fewmoments, he said to Mr. Fogg, “These are long and slow hours, sir, thatwe are passing on the railway.”“Yes,” replied Mr. Fogg; “but they pass.”“You were in the habit of playing whist,” resumed Fix, “on thesteamers.”“Yes; but it would be difficult to do so here. I have neither cards norpartners.”“Oh, but we can easily buy some cards, for they are sold on all theAmerican trains. And as for partners, if madam plays—”“Certainly, sir,” Aouda quickly replied; “I understand whist. It ispart of an English education.”“I myself have some pretensions to playing a good game. Well, here arethree of us, and a dummy—”“As you please, sir,” replied Phileas Fogg, heartily glad to resume hisfavourite pastime even on the railway.Passepartout was dispatched in search of the steward, and soon returnedwith two packs of cards, some pins, counters, and a shelf covered withcloth.The game commenced. Aouda understood whist sufficiently well, and evenreceived some compliments on her playing from Mr. Fogg. As for thedetective, he was simply an adept, and worthy of being matched againsthis present opponent.“Now,” thought Passepartout, “we’ve got him. He won’t budge.”At eleven in the morning the train had reached the dividing ridge ofthe waters at Bridger Pass, seven thousand five hundred and twenty-fourfeet above the level of the sea, one of the highest points attained bythe track in crossing the Rocky Mountains. After going about twohundred miles, the travellers at last found themselves on one of thosevast plains which extend to the Atlantic, and which nature has made sopropitious for laying the iron road.On the declivity of the Atlantic basin the first streams, branches ofthe North Platte River, already appeared. The whole northern andeastern horizon was bounded by the immense semi-circular curtain whichis formed by the southern portion of the Rocky Mountains, the highestbeing Laramie Peak. Between this and the railway extended vast plains,plentifully irrigated. On the right rose the lower spurs of themountainous mass which extends southward to the sources of the ArkansasRiver, one of the great tributaries of the Missouri.At half-past twelve the travellers caught sight for an instant of FortHalleck, which commands that section; and in a few more hours the RockyMountains were crossed. There was reason to hope, then, that noaccident would mark the journey through this difficult country. Thesnow had ceased falling, and the air became crisp and cold. Largebirds, frightened by the locomotive, rose and flew off in the distance.No wild beast appeared on the plain. It was a desert in its vastnakedness.After a comfortable breakfast, served in the car, Mr. Fogg and hispartners had just resumed whist, when a violent whistling was heard,and the train stopped. Passepartout put his head out of the door, butsaw nothing to cause the delay; no station was in view.Aouda and Fix feared that Mr. Fogg might take it into his head to getout; but that gentleman contented himself with saying to his servant,“See what is the matter.”Passepartout rushed out of the car. Thirty or forty passengers hadalready descended, amongst them Colonel Stamp Proctor.The train had stopped before a red signal which blocked the way. Theengineer and conductor were talking excitedly with a signal-man, whomthe station-master at Medicine Bow, the next stopping place, had senton before. The passengers drew around and took part in the discussion,in which Colonel Proctor, with his insolent manner, was conspicuous.Passepartout, joining the group, heard the signal-man say, “No! youcan’t pass. The bridge at Medicine Bow is shaky, and would not bear theweight of the train.”This was a suspension-bridge thrown over some rapids, about a mile fromthe place where they now were. According to the signal-man, it was in aruinous condition, several of the iron wires being broken; and it wasimpossible to risk the passage. He did not in any way exaggerate thecondition of the bridge. It may be taken for granted that, rash as theAmericans usually are, when they are prudent there is good reason forit.Passepartout, not daring to apprise his master of what he heard,listened with set teeth, immovable as a statue.“Hum!” cried Colonel Proctor; “but we are not going to stay here, Iimagine, and take root in the snow?”“Colonel,” replied the conductor, “we have telegraphed to Omaha for atrain, but it is not likely that it will reach Medicine Bow in lessthan six hours.”“Six hours!” cried Passepartout.“Certainly,” returned the conductor, “besides, it will take us as longas that to reach Medicine Bow on foot.”“But it is only a mile from here,” said one of the passengers.“Yes, but it’s on the other side of the river.”“And can’t we cross that in a boat?” asked the colonel.“That’s impossible. The creek is swelled by the rains. It is a rapid,and we shall have to make a circuit of ten miles to the north to find aford.”The colonel launched a volley of oaths, denouncing the railway companyand the conductor; and Passepartout, who was furious, was notdisinclined to make common cause with him. Here was an obstacle,indeed, which all his master’s banknotes could not remove.There was a general disappointment among the passengers, who, withoutreckoning the delay, saw themselves compelled to trudge fifteen milesover a plain covered with snow. They grumbled and protested, and wouldcertainly have thus attracted Phileas Fogg’s attention if he had notbeen completely absorbed in his game.Passepartout found that he could not avoid telling his master what hadoccurred, and, with hanging head, he was turning towards the car, whenthe engineer, a true Yankee, named Forster called out, “Gentlemen,perhaps there is a way, after all, to get over.”“On the bridge?” asked a passenger.“On the bridge.”“With our train?”“With our train.”Passepartout stopped short, and eagerly listened to the engineer.“But the bridge is unsafe,” urged the conductor.“No matter,” replied Forster; “I think that by putting on the veryhighest speed we might have a chance of getting over.”“The devil!” muttered Passepartout.But a number of the passengers were at once attracted by the engineer’sproposal, and Colonel Proctor was especially delighted, and found theplan a very feasible one. He told stories about engineers leaping theirtrains over rivers without bridges, by putting on full steam; and manyof those present avowed themselves of the engineer’s mind.“We have fifty chances out of a hundred of getting over,” said one.“Eighty! ninety!”Passepartout was astounded, and, though ready to attempt anything toget over Medicine Creek, thought the experiment proposed a little tooAmerican. “Besides,” thought he, “there’s a still more simple way, andit does not even occur to any of these people! Sir,” said he aloud toone of the passengers, “the engineer’s plan seems to me a littledangerous, but—”“Eighty chances!” replied the passenger, turning his back on him.“I know it,” said Passepartout, turning to another passenger, “but asimple idea—”“Ideas are no use,” returned the American, shrugging his shoulders, “asthe engineer assures us that we can pass.”“Doubtless,” urged Passepartout, “we can pass, but perhaps it would bemore prudent—”“What! Prudent!” cried Colonel Proctor, whom this word seemed to exciteprodigiously. “At full speed, don’t you see, at full speed!”“I know—I see,” repeated Passepartout; “but it would be, if not moreprudent, since that word displeases you, at least more natural—”“Who! What! What’s the matter with this fellow?” cried several.The poor fellow did not know to whom to address himself.“Are you afraid?” asked Colonel Proctor.“I afraid? Very well; I will show these people that a Frenchman can beas American as they!”“All aboard!” cried the conductor.“Yes, all aboard!” repeated Passepartout, and immediately. “But theycan’t prevent me from thinking that it would be more natural for us tocross the bridge on foot, and let the train come after!”But no one heard this sage reflection, nor would anyone haveacknowledged its justice. The passengers resumed their places in thecars. Passepartout took his seat without telling what had passed. Thewhist-players were quite absorbed in their game.The locomotive whistled vigorously; the engineer, reversing the steam,backed the train for nearly a mile—retiring, like a jumper, in order totake a longer leap. Then, with another whistle, he began to moveforward; the train increased its speed, and soon its rapidity becamefrightful; a prolonged screech issued from the locomotive; the pistonworked up and down twenty strokes to the second. They perceived thatthe whole train, rushing on at the rate of a hundred miles an hour,hardly bore upon the rails at all.And they passed over! It was like a flash. No one saw the bridge. Thetrain leaped, so to speak, from one bank to the other, and the engineercould not stop it until it had gone five miles beyond the station. Butscarcely had the train passed the river, when the bridge, completelyruined, fell with a crash into the rapids of Medicine Bow.CHAPTER XXIX.IN WHICH CERTAIN INCIDENTS ARE NARRATED WHICH ARE ONLY TO BE MET WITHON AMERICAN RAILROADSThe train pursued its course, that evening, without interruption,passing Fort Saunders, crossing Cheyne Pass, and reaching Evans Pass.The road here attained the highest elevation of the journey, eightthousand and ninety-two feet above the level of the sea. The travellershad now only to descend to the Atlantic by limitless plains, levelledby nature. A branch of the “grand trunk” led off southward to Denver,the capital of Colorado. The country round about is rich in gold andsilver, and more than fifty thousand inhabitants are already settledthere.Thirteen hundred and eighty-two miles had been passed over from SanFrancisco, in three days and three nights; four days and nights morewould probably bring them to New York. Phileas Fogg was not as yetbehind-hand.During the night Camp Walbach was passed on the left; Lodge Pole Creekran parallel with the road, marking the boundary between theterritories of Wyoming and Colorado. They entered Nebraska at eleven,passed near Sedgwick, and touched at Julesburg, on the southern branchof the Platte River.It was here that the Union Pacific Railroad was inaugurated on the 23rdof October, 1867, by the chief engineer, General Dodge. Two powerfullocomotives, carrying nine cars of invited guests, amongst whom wasThomas C. Durant, vice-president of the road, stopped at this point;cheers were given, the Sioux and Pawnees performed an imitation Indianbattle, fireworks were let off, and the first number of the _RailwayPioneer_ was printed by a press brought on the train. Thus wascelebrated the inauguration of this great railroad, a mighty instrumentof progress and civilisation, thrown across the desert, and destined tolink together cities and towns which do not yet exist. The whistle ofthe locomotive, more powerful than Amphion’s lyre, was about to bidthem rise from American soil.Fort McPherson was left behind at eight in the morning, and threehundred and fifty-seven miles had yet to be traversed before reachingOmaha. The road followed the capricious windings of the southern branchof the Platte River, on its left bank. At nine the train stopped at theimportant town of North Platte, built between the two arms of theriver, which rejoin each other around it and form a single artery, alarge tributary, whose waters empty into the Missouri a little aboveOmaha.The one hundred and first meridian was passed.Mr. Fogg and his partners had resumed their game; no one—not even thedummy—complained of the length of the trip. Fix had begun by winningseveral guineas, which he seemed likely to lose; but he showed himselfa not less eager whist-player than Mr. Fogg. During the morning, chancedistinctly favoured that gentleman. Trumps and honours were showeredupon his hands.Once, having resolved on a bold stroke, he was on the point of playinga spade, when a voice behind him said, “I should play a diamond.”Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Fix raised their heads, and beheld ColonelProctor.Stamp Proctor and Phileas Fogg recognised each other at once.“Ah! it’s you, is it, Englishman?” cried the colonel; “it’s you who aregoing to play a spade!”“And who plays it,” replied Phileas Fogg coolly, throwing down the tenof spades.“Well, it pleases me to have it diamonds,” replied Colonel Proctor, inan insolent tone.He made a movement as if to seize the card which had just been played,adding, “You don’t understand anything about whist.”“Perhaps I do, as well as another,” said Phileas Fogg, rising.“You have only to try, son of John Bull,” replied the colonel.Aouda turned pale, and her blood ran cold. She seized Mr. Fogg’s armand gently pulled him back. Passepartout was ready to pounce upon theAmerican, who was staring insolently at his opponent. But Fix got up,and, going to Colonel Proctor said, “You forget that it is I with whomyou have to deal, sir; for it was I whom you not only insulted, butstruck!”“Mr. Fix,” said Mr. Fogg, “pardon me, but this affair is mine, and mineonly. The colonel has again insulted me, by insisting that I should notplay a spade, and he shall give me satisfaction for it.”“When and where you will,” replied the American, “and with whateverweapon you choose.”Aouda in vain attempted to retain Mr. Fogg; as vainly did the detectiveendeavour to make the quarrel his. Passepartout wished to throw thecolonel out of the window, but a sign from his master checked him.Phileas Fogg left the car, and the American followed him upon theplatform. “Sir,” said Mr. Fogg to his adversary, “I am in a great hurryto get back to Europe, and any delay whatever will be greatly to mydisadvantage.”“Well, what’s that to me?” replied Colonel Proctor.“Sir,” said Mr. Fogg, very politely, “after our meeting at SanFrancisco, I determined to return to America and find you as soon as Ihad completed the business which called me to England.”“Really!”“Will you appoint a meeting for six months hence?”“Why not ten years hence?”“I say six months,” returned Phileas Fogg; “and I shall be at the placeof meeting promptly.”“All this is an evasion,” cried Stamp Proctor. “Now or never!”“Very good. You are going to New York?”“No.”“To Chicago?”“No.”“To Omaha?”“What difference is it to you? Do you know Plum Creek?”“No,” replied Mr. Fogg.“It’s the next station. The train will be there in an hour, and willstop there ten minutes. In ten minutes several revolver-shots could beexchanged.”“Very well,” said Mr. Fogg. “I will stop at Plum Creek.”“And I guess you’ll stay there too,” added the American insolently.“Who knows?” replied Mr. Fogg, returning to the car as coolly as usual.He began to reassure Aouda, telling her that blusterers were never tobe feared, and begged Fix to be his second at the approaching duel, arequest which the detective could not refuse. Mr. Fogg resumed theinterrupted game with perfect calmness.At eleven o’clock the locomotive’s whistle announced that they wereapproaching Plum Creek station. Mr. Fogg rose, and, followed by Fix,went out upon the platform. Passepartout accompanied him, carrying apair of revolvers. Aouda remained in the car, as pale as death.The door of the next car opened, and Colonel Proctor appeared on theplatform, attended by a Yankee of his own stamp as his second. But justas the combatants were about to step from the train, the conductorhurried up, and shouted, “You can’t get off, gentlemen!”“Why not?” asked the colonel.“We are twenty minutes late, and we shall not stop.”“But I am going to fight a duel with this gentleman.”“I am sorry,” said the conductor; “but we shall be off at once. There’sthe bell ringing now.”The train started.“I’m really very sorry, gentlemen,” said the conductor. “Under anyother circumstances I should have been happy to oblige you. But, afterall, as you have not had time to fight here, why not fight as we goalong?”“That wouldn’t be convenient, perhaps, for this gentleman,” said thecolonel, in a jeering tone.“It would be perfectly so,” replied Phileas Fogg.“Well, we are really in America,” thought Passepartout, “and theconductor is a gentleman of the first order!”So muttering, he followed his master.The two combatants, their seconds, and the conductor passed through thecars to the rear of the train. The last car was only occupied by adozen passengers, whom the conductor politely asked if they would notbe so kind as to leave it vacant for a few moments, as two gentlemenhad an affair of honour to settle. The passengers granted the requestwith alacrity, and straightway disappeared on the platform.The car, which was some fifty feet long, was very convenient for theirpurpose. The adversaries might march on each other in the aisle, andfire at their ease. Never was duel more easily arranged. Mr. Fogg andColonel Proctor, each provided with two six-barrelled revolvers,entered the car. The seconds, remaining outside, shut them in. Theywere to begin firing at the first whistle of the locomotive. After aninterval of two minutes, what remained of the two gentlemen would betaken from the car.Nothing could be more simple. Indeed, it was all so simple that Fix andPassepartout felt their hearts beating as if they would crack. Theywere listening for the whistle agreed upon, when suddenly savage criesresounded in the air, accompanied by reports which certainly did notissue from the car where the duellists were. The reports continued infront and the whole length of the train. Cries of terror proceeded fromthe interior of the cars.Colonel Proctor and Mr. Fogg, revolvers in hand, hastily quitted theirprison, and rushed forward where the noise was most clamorous. Theythen perceived that the train was attacked by a band of Sioux.This was not the first attempt of these daring Indians, for more thanonce they had waylaid trains on the road. A hundred of them had,according to their habit, jumped upon the steps without stopping thetrain, with the ease of a clown mounting a horse at full gallop.The Sioux were armed with guns, from which came the reports, to whichthe passengers, who were almost all armed, responded by revolver-shots.The Indians had first mounted the engine, and half stunned the engineerand stoker with blows from their muskets. A Sioux chief, wishing tostop the train, but not knowing how to work the regulator, had openedwide instead of closing the steam-valve, and the locomotive wasplunging forward with terrific velocity.The Sioux had at the same time invaded the cars, skipping like enragedmonkeys over the roofs, thrusting open the doors, and fighting hand tohand with the passengers. Penetrating the baggage-car, they pillagedit, throwing the trunks out of the train. The cries and shots wereconstant. The travellers defended themselves bravely; some of the carswere barricaded, and sustained a siege, like moving forts, carriedalong at a speed of a hundred miles an hour.Aouda behaved courageously from the first. She defended herself like atrue heroine with a revolver, which she shot through the broken windowswhenever a savage made his appearance. Twenty Sioux had fallen mortallywounded to the ground, and the wheels crushed those who fell upon therails as if they had been worms. Several passengers, shot or stunned,lay on the seats.It was necessary to put an end to the struggle, which had lasted forten minutes, and which would result in the triumph of the Sioux if thetrain was not stopped. Fort Kearney station, where there was agarrison, was only two miles distant; but, that once passed, the Siouxwould be masters of the train between Fort Kearney and the stationbeyond.The conductor was fighting beside Mr. Fogg, when he was shot and fell.At the same moment he cried, “Unless the train is stopped in fiveminutes, we are lost!”“It shall be stopped,” said Phileas Fogg, preparing to rush from thecar.“Stay, monsieur,” cried Passepartout; “I will go.”Mr. Fogg had not time to stop the brave fellow, who, opening a doorunperceived by the Indians, succeeded in slipping under the car; andwhile the struggle continued and the balls whizzed across each otherover his head, he made use of his old acrobatic experience, and withamazing agility worked his way under the cars, holding on to thechains, aiding himself by the brakes and edges of the sashes, creepingfrom one car to another with marvellous skill, and thus gaining theforward end of the train.There, suspended by one hand between the baggage-car and the tender,with the other he loosened the safety chains; but, owing to thetraction, he would never have succeeded in unscrewing the yoking-bar,had not a violent concussion jolted this bar out. The train, nowdetached from the engine, remained a little behind, whilst thelocomotive rushed forward with increased speed.Carried on by the force already acquired, the train still moved forseveral minutes; but the brakes were worked and at last they stopped,less than a hundred feet from Kearney station.The soldiers of the fort, attracted by the shots, hurried up; the Siouxhad not expected them, and decamped in a body before the train entirelystopped.But when the passengers counted each other on the station platformseveral were found missing; among others the courageous Frenchman,whose devotion had just saved them.CHAPTER XXX.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG SIMPLY DOES HIS DUTYThree passengers including Passepartout had disappeared. Had they beenkilled in the struggle? Were they taken prisoners by the Sioux? It wasimpossible to tell.There were many wounded, but none mortally. Colonel Proctor was one ofthe most seriously hurt; he had fought bravely, and a ball had enteredhis groin. He was carried into the station with the other woundedpassengers, to receive such attention as could be of avail.Aouda was safe; and Phileas Fogg, who had been in the thickest of thefight, had not received a scratch. Fix was slightly wounded in the arm.But Passepartout was not to be found, and tears coursed down Aouda’scheeks.All the passengers had got out of the train, the wheels of which werestained with blood. From the tyres and spokes hung ragged pieces offlesh. As far as the eye could reach on the white plain behind, redtrails were visible. The last Sioux were disappearing in the south,along the banks of Republican River.Mr. Fogg, with folded arms, remained motionless. He had a seriousdecision to make. Aouda, standing near him, looked at him withoutspeaking, and he understood her look. If his servant was a prisoner,ought he not to risk everything to rescue him from the Indians? “I willfind him, living or dead,” said he quietly to Aouda.“Ah, Mr.—Mr. Fogg!” cried she, clasping his hands and covering themwith tears.“Living,” added Mr. Fogg, “if we do not lose a moment.”Phileas Fogg, by this resolution, inevitably sacrificed himself; hepronounced his own doom. The delay of a single day would make him losethe steamer at New York, and his bet would be certainly lost. But as hethought, “It is my duty,” he did not hesitate.The commanding officer of Fort Kearney was there. A hundred of hissoldiers had placed themselves in a position to defend the station,should the Sioux attack it.“Sir,” said Mr. Fogg to the captain, “three passengers havedisappeared.”“Dead?” asked the captain.“Dead or prisoners; that is the uncertainty which must be solved. Doyou propose to pursue the Sioux?”“That’s a serious thing to do, sir,” returned the captain. “TheseIndians may retreat beyond the Arkansas, and I cannot leave the fortunprotected.”“The lives of three men are in question, sir,” said Phileas Fogg.“Doubtless; but can I risk the lives of fifty men to save three?”“I don’t know whether you can, sir; but you ought to do so.”“Nobody here,” returned the other, “has a right to teach me my duty.”“Very well,” said Mr. Fogg, coldly. “I will go alone.”“You, sir!” cried Fix, coming up; “you go alone in pursuit of theIndians?”“Would you have me leave this poor fellow to perish—him to whom everyone present owes his life? I shall go.”“No, sir, you shall not go alone,” cried the captain, touched in spiteof himself. “No! you are a brave man. Thirty volunteers!” he added,turning to the soldiers.The whole company started forward at once. The captain had only to pickhis men. Thirty were chosen, and an old sergeant placed at their head.“Thanks, captain,” said Mr. Fogg.“Will you let me go with you?” asked Fix.“Do as you please, sir. But if you wish to do me a favour, you willremain with Aouda. In case anything should happen to me—”A sudden pallor overspread the detective’s face. Separate himself fromthe man whom he had so persistently followed step by step! Leave him towander about in this desert! Fix gazed attentively at Mr. Fogg, and,despite his suspicions and of the struggle which was going on withinhim, he lowered his eyes before that calm and frank look.“I will stay,” said he.A few moments after, Mr. Fogg pressed the young woman’s hand, and,having confided to her his precious carpet-bag, went off with thesergeant and his little squad. But, before going, he had said to thesoldiers, “My friends, I will divide five thousand dollars among you,if we save the prisoners.”It was then a little past noon.Aouda retired to a waiting-room, and there she waited alone, thinkingof the simple and noble generosity, the tranquil courage of PhileasFogg. He had sacrificed his fortune, and was now risking his life, allwithout hesitation, from duty, in silence.Fix did not have the same thoughts, and could scarcely conceal hisagitation. He walked feverishly up and down the platform, but soonresumed his outward composure. He now saw the folly of which he hadbeen guilty in letting Fogg go alone. What! This man, whom he had justfollowed around the world, was permitted now to separate himself fromhim! He began to accuse and abuse himself, and, as if he were directorof police, administered to himself a sound lecture for his greenness.“I have been an idiot!” he thought, “and this man will see it. He hasgone, and won’t come back! But how is it that I, Fix, who have in mypocket a warrant for his arrest, have been so fascinated by him?Decidedly, I am nothing but an ass!”So reasoned the detective, while the hours crept by all too slowly. Hedid not know what to do. Sometimes he was tempted to tell Aouda all;but he could not doubt how the young woman would receive hisconfidences. What course should he take? He thought of pursuing Foggacross the vast white plains; it did not seem impossible that he mightovertake him. Footsteps were easily printed on the snow! But soon,under a new sheet, every imprint would be effaced.Fix became discouraged. He felt a sort of insurmountable longing toabandon the game altogether. He could now leave Fort Kearney station,and pursue his journey homeward in peace.Towards two o’clock in the afternoon, while it was snowing hard, longwhistles were heard approaching from the east. A great shadow, precededby a wild light, slowly advanced, appearing still larger through themist, which gave it a fantastic aspect. No train was expected from theeast, neither had there been time for the succour asked for bytelegraph to arrive; the train from Omaha to San Francisco was not duetill the next day. The mystery was soon explained.The locomotive, which was slowly approaching with deafening whistles,was that which, having been detached from the train, had continued itsroute with such terrific rapidity, carrying off the unconsciousengineer and stoker. It had run several miles, when, the fire becominglow for want of fuel, the steam had slackened; and it had finallystopped an hour after, some twenty miles beyond Fort Kearney. Neitherthe engineer nor the stoker was dead, and, after remaining for sometime in their swoon, had come to themselves. The train had thenstopped. The engineer, when he found himself in the desert, and thelocomotive without cars, understood what had happened. He could notimagine how the locomotive had become separated from the train; but hedid not doubt that the train left behind was in distress.He did not hesitate what to do. It would be prudent to continue on toOmaha, for it would be dangerous to return to the train, which theIndians might still be engaged in pillaging. Nevertheless, he began torebuild the fire in the furnace; the pressure again mounted, and thelocomotive returned, running backwards to Fort Kearney. This it waswhich was whistling in the mist.The travellers were glad to see the locomotive resume its place at thehead of the train. They could now continue the journey so terriblyinterrupted.Aouda, on seeing the locomotive come up, hurried out of the station,and asked the conductor, “Are you going to start?”“At once, madam.”“But the prisoners, our unfortunate fellow-travellers—”“I cannot interrupt the trip,” replied the conductor. “We are alreadythree hours behind time.”“And when will another train pass here from San Francisco?”“To-morrow evening, madam.”“To-morrow evening! But then it will be too late! We must wait—”“It is impossible,” responded the conductor. “If you wish to go, pleaseget in.”“I will not go,” said Aouda.Fix had heard this conversation. A little while before, when there wasno prospect of proceeding on the journey, he had made up his mind toleave Fort Kearney; but now that the train was there, ready to start,and he had only to take his seat in the car, an irresistible influenceheld him back. The station platform burned his feet, and he could notstir. The conflict in his mind again began; anger and failure stifledhim. He wished to struggle on to the end.Meanwhile the passengers and some of the wounded, among them ColonelProctor, whose injuries were serious, had taken their places in thetrain. The buzzing of the over-heated boiler was heard, and the steamwas escaping from the valves. The engineer whistled, the train started,and soon disappeared, mingling its white smoke with the eddies of thedensely falling snow.The detective had remained behind.Several hours passed. The weather was dismal, and it was very cold. Fixsat motionless on a bench in the station; he might have been thoughtasleep. Aouda, despite the storm, kept coming out of the waiting-room,going to the end of the platform, and peering through the tempest ofsnow, as if to pierce the mist which narrowed the horizon around her,and to hear, if possible, some welcome sound. She heard and sawnothing. Then she would return, chilled through, to issue out againafter the lapse of a few moments, but always in vain.Evening came, and the little band had not returned. Where could theybe? Had they found the Indians, and were they having a conflict withthem, or were they still wandering amid the mist? The commander of thefort was anxious, though he tried to conceal his apprehensions. Asnight approached, the snow fell less plentifully, but it becameintensely cold. Absolute silence rested on the plains. Neither flightof bird nor passing of beast troubled the perfect calm.Throughout the night Aouda, full of sad forebodings, her heart stifledwith anguish, wandered about on the verge of the plains. Herimagination carried her far off, and showed her innumerable dangers.What she suffered through the long hours it would be impossible todescribe.Fix remained stationary in the same place, but did not sleep. Once aman approached and spoke to him, and the detective merely replied byshaking his head.Thus the night passed. At dawn, the half-extinguished disc of the sunrose above a misty horizon; but it was now possible to recogniseobjects two miles off. Phileas Fogg and the squad had gone southward;in the south all was still vacancy. It was then seven o’clock.The captain, who was really alarmed, did not know what course to take.Should he send another detachment to the rescue of the first? Should hesacrifice more men, with so few chances of saving those alreadysacrificed? His hesitation did not last long, however. Calling one ofhis lieutenants, he was on the point of ordering a reconnaissance, whengunshots were heard. Was it a signal? The soldiers rushed out of thefort, and half a mile off they perceived a little band returning ingood order.Mr. Fogg was marching at their head, and just behind him werePassepartout and the other two travellers, rescued from the Sioux.They had met and fought the Indians ten miles south of Fort Kearney.Shortly before the detachment arrived, Passepartout and his companionshad begun to struggle with their captors, three of whom the Frenchmanhad felled with his fists, when his master and the soldiers hastened upto their relief.All were welcomed with joyful cries. Phileas Fogg distributed thereward he had promised to the soldiers, while Passepartout, not withoutreason, muttered to himself, “It must certainly be confessed that Icost my master dear!”Fix, without saying a word, looked at Mr. Fogg, and it would have beendifficult to analyse the thoughts which struggled within him. As forAouda, she took her protector’s hand and pressed it in her own, toomuch moved to speak.Meanwhile, Passepartout was looking about for the train; he thought heshould find it there, ready to start for Omaha, and he hoped that thetime lost might be regained.“The train! the train!” cried he.“Gone,” replied Fix.“And when does the next train pass here?” said Phileas Fogg.“Not till this evening.”“Ah!” returned the impassible gentleman quietly.CHAPTER XXXI.IN WHICH FIX, THE DETECTIVE, CONSIDERABLY FURTHERS THE INTERESTS OFPHILEAS FOGGPhileas Fogg found himself twenty hours behind time. Passepartout, theinvoluntary cause of this delay, was desperate. He had ruined hismaster!At this moment the detective approached Mr. Fogg, and, looking himintently in the face, said:“Seriously, sir, are you in great haste?”“Quite seriously.”“I have a purpose in asking,” resumed Fix. “Is it absolutely necessarythat you should be in New York on the 11th, before nine o’clock in theevening, the time that the steamer leaves for Liverpool?”“It is absolutely necessary.”“And, if your journey had not been interrupted by these Indians, youwould have reached New York on the morning of the 11th?”“Yes; with eleven hours to spare before the steamer left.”“Good! you are therefore twenty hours behind. Twelve from twenty leaveseight. You must regain eight hours. Do you wish to try to do so?”“On foot?” asked Mr. Fogg.“No; on a sledge,” replied Fix. “On a sledge with sails. A man hasproposed such a method to me.”It was the man who had spoken to Fix during the night, and whose offerhe had refused.Phileas Fogg did not reply at once; but Fix, having pointed out theman, who was walking up and down in front of the station, Mr. Fogg wentup to him. An instant after, Mr. Fogg and the American, whose name wasMudge, entered a hut built just below the fort.There Mr. Fogg examined a curious vehicle, a kind of frame on two longbeams, a little raised in front like the runners of a sledge, and uponwhich there was room for five or six persons. A high mast was fixed onthe frame, held firmly by metallic lashings, to which was attached alarge brigantine sail. This mast held an iron stay upon which to hoista jib-sail. Behind, a sort of rudder served to guide the vehicle. Itwas, in short, a sledge rigged like a sloop. During the winter, whenthe trains are blocked up by the snow, these sledges make extremelyrapid journeys across the frozen plains from one station to another.Provided with more sails than a cutter, and with the wind behind them,they slip over the surface of the prairies with a speed equal if notsuperior to that of the express trains.Mr. Fogg readily made a bargain with the owner of this land-craft. Thewind was favourable, being fresh, and blowing from the west. The snowhad hardened, and Mudge was very confident of being able to transportMr. Fogg in a few hours to Omaha. Thence the trains eastward runfrequently to Chicago and New York. It was not impossible that the losttime might yet be recovered; and such an opportunity was not to berejected.Not wishing to expose Aouda to the discomforts of travelling in theopen air, Mr. Fogg proposed to leave her with Passepartout at FortKearney, the servant taking upon himself to escort her to Europe by abetter route and under more favourable conditions. But Aouda refused toseparate from Mr. Fogg, and Passepartout was delighted with herdecision; for nothing could induce him to leave his master while Fixwas with him.It would be difficult to guess the detective’s thoughts. Was thisconviction shaken by Phileas Fogg’s return, or did he still regard himas an exceedingly shrewd rascal, who, his journey round the worldcompleted, would think himself absolutely safe in England? PerhapsFix’s opinion of Phileas Fogg was somewhat modified; but he wasnevertheless resolved to do his duty, and to hasten the return of thewhole party to England as much as possible.At eight o’clock the sledge was ready to start. The passengers tooktheir places on it, and wrapped themselves up closely in theirtravelling-cloaks. The two great sails were hoisted, and under thepressure of the wind the sledge slid over the hardened snow with avelocity of forty miles an hour.The distance between Fort Kearney and Omaha, as the birds fly, is atmost two hundred miles. If the wind held good, the distance might betraversed in five hours; if no accident happened the sledge might reachOmaha by one o’clock.What a journey! The travellers, huddled close together, could not speakfor the cold, intensified by the rapidity at which they were going. Thesledge sped on as lightly as a boat over the waves. When the breezecame skimming the earth the sledge seemed to be lifted off the groundby its sails. Mudge, who was at the rudder, kept in a straight line,and by a turn of his hand checked the lurches which the vehicle had atendency to make. All the sails were up, and the jib was so arranged asnot to screen the brigantine. A top-mast was hoisted, and another jib,held out to the wind, added its force to the other sails. Although thespeed could not be exactly estimated, the sledge could not be going atless than forty miles an hour.“If nothing breaks,” said Mudge, “we shall get there!”Mr. Fogg had made it for Mudge’s interest to reach Omaha within thetime agreed on, by the offer of a handsome reward.The prairie, across which the sledge was moving in a straight line, wasas flat as a sea. It seemed like a vast frozen lake. The railroad whichran through this section ascended from the south-west to the north-westby Great Island, Columbus, an important Nebraska town, Schuyler, andFremont, to Omaha. It followed throughout the right bank of the PlatteRiver. The sledge, shortening this route, took a chord of the arcdescribed by the railway. Mudge was not afraid of being stopped by thePlatte River, because it was frozen. The road, then, was quite clear ofobstacles, and Phileas Fogg had but two things to fear—an accident tothe sledge, and a change or calm in the wind.But the breeze, far from lessening its force, blew as if to bend themast, which, however, the metallic lashings held firmly. Theselashings, like the chords of a stringed instrument, resounded as ifvibrated by a violin bow. The sledge slid along in the midst of aplaintively intense melody.“Those chords give the fifth and the octave,” said Mr. Fogg.These were the only words he uttered during the journey. Aouda, cosilypacked in furs and cloaks, was sheltered as much as possible from theattacks of the freezing wind. As for Passepartout, his face was as redas the sun’s disc when it sets in the mist, and he laboriously inhaledthe biting air. With his natural buoyancy of spirits, he began to hopeagain. They would reach New York on the evening, if not on the morning,of the 11th, and there were still some chances that it would be beforethe steamer sailed for Liverpool.Passepartout even felt a strong desire to grasp his ally, Fix, by thehand. He remembered that it was the detective who procured the sledge,the only means of reaching Omaha in time; but, checked by somepresentiment, he kept his usual reserve. One thing, however,Passepartout would never forget, and that was the sacrifice which Mr.Fogg had made, without hesitation, to rescue him from the Sioux. Mr.Fogg had risked his fortune and his life. No! His servant would neverforget that!While each of the party was absorbed in reflections so different, thesledge flew past over the vast carpet of snow. The creeks it passedover were not perceived. Fields and streams disappeared under theuniform whiteness. The plain was absolutely deserted. Between the UnionPacific road and the branch which unites Kearney with Saint Joseph itformed a great uninhabited island. Neither village, station, nor fortappeared. From time to time they sped by some phantom-like tree, whosewhite skeleton twisted and rattled in the wind. Sometimes flocks ofwild birds rose, or bands of gaunt, famished, ferocious prairie-wolvesran howling after the sledge. Passepartout, revolver in hand, heldhimself ready to fire on those which came too near. Had an accidentthen happened to the sledge, the travellers, attacked by these beasts,would have been in the most terrible danger; but it held on its evencourse, soon gained on the wolves, and ere long left the howling bandat a safe distance behind.About noon Mudge perceived by certain landmarks that he was crossingthe Platte River. He said nothing, but he felt certain that he was nowwithin twenty miles of Omaha. In less than an hour he left the rudderand furled his sails, whilst the sledge, carried forward by the greatimpetus the wind had given it, went on half a mile further with itssails unspread.It stopped at last, and Mudge, pointing to a mass of roofs white withsnow, said: “We have got there!”Arrived! Arrived at the station which is in daily communication, bynumerous trains, with the Atlantic seaboard!Passepartout and Fix jumped off, stretched their stiffened limbs, andaided Mr. Fogg and the young woman to descend from the sledge. PhileasFogg generously rewarded Mudge, whose hand Passepartout warmly grasped,and the party directed their steps to the Omaha railway station.The Pacific Railroad proper finds its terminus at this importantNebraska town. Omaha is connected with Chicago by the Chicago and RockIsland Railroad, which runs directly east, and passes fifty stations.A train was ready to start when Mr. Fogg and his party reached thestation, and they only had time to get into the cars. They had seennothing of Omaha; but Passepartout confessed to himself that this wasnot to be regretted, as they were not travelling to see the sights.The train passed rapidly across the State of Iowa, by Council Bluffs,Des Moines, and Iowa City. During the night it crossed the Mississippiat Davenport, and by Rock Island entered Illinois. The next day, whichwas the 10th, at four o’clock in the evening, it reached Chicago,already risen from its ruins, and more proudly seated than ever on theborders of its beautiful Lake Michigan.Nine hundred miles separated Chicago from New York; but trains are notwanting at Chicago. Mr. Fogg passed at once from one to the other, andthe locomotive of the Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne, and Chicago Railway leftat full speed, as if it fully comprehended that that gentleman had notime to lose. It traversed Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New Jerseylike a flash, rushing through towns with antique names, some of whichhad streets and car-tracks, but as yet no houses. At last the Hudsoncame into view; and, at a quarter-past eleven in the evening of the11th, the train stopped in the station on the right bank of the river,before the very pier of the Cunard line.The “China,” for Liverpool, had started three-quarters of an hourbefore!CHAPTER XXXII.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG ENGAGES IN A DIRECT STRUGGLE WITH BAD FORTUNEThe “China,” in leaving, seemed to have carried off Phileas Fogg’s lasthope. None of the other steamers were able to serve his projects. The“Pereire,” of the French Transatlantic Company, whose admirablesteamers are equal to any in speed and comfort, did not leave until the14th; the Hamburg boats did not go directly to Liverpool or London, butto Havre; and the additional trip from Havre to Southampton wouldrender Phileas Fogg’s last efforts of no avail. The Inman steamer didnot depart till the next day, and could not cross the Atlantic in timeto save the wager.Mr. Fogg learned all this in consulting his “Bradshaw,” which gave himthe daily movements of the transatlantic steamers.Passepartout was crushed; it overwhelmed him to lose the boat bythree-quarters of an hour. It was his fault, for, instead of helpinghis master, he had not ceased putting obstacles in his path! And whenhe recalled all the incidents of the tour, when he counted up the sumsexpended in pure loss and on his own account, when he thought that theimmense stake, added to the heavy charges of this useless journey,would completely ruin Mr. Fogg, he overwhelmed himself with bitterself-accusations. Mr. Fogg, however, did not reproach him; and, onleaving the Cunard pier, only said: “We will consult about what is bestto-morrow. Come.”The party crossed the Hudson in the Jersey City ferryboat, and drove ina carriage to the St. Nicholas Hotel, on Broadway. Rooms were engaged,and the night passed, briefly to Phileas Fogg, who slept profoundly,but very long to Aouda and the others, whose agitation did not permitthem to rest.The next day was the 12th of December. From seven in the morning of the12th to a quarter before nine in the evening of the 21st there werenine days, thirteen hours, and forty-five minutes. If Phileas Fogg hadleft in the “China,” one of the fastest steamers on the Atlantic, hewould have reached Liverpool, and then London, within the period agreedupon.Mr. Fogg left the hotel alone, after giving Passepartout instructionsto await his return, and inform Aouda to be ready at an instant’snotice. He proceeded to the banks of the Hudson, and looked about amongthe vessels moored or anchored in the river, for any that were about todepart. Several had departure signals, and were preparing to put to seaat morning tide; for in this immense and admirable port there is notone day in a hundred that vessels do not set out for every quarter ofthe globe. But they were mostly sailing vessels, of which, of course,Phileas Fogg could make no use.He seemed about to give up all hope, when he espied, anchored at theBattery, a cable’s length off at most, a trading vessel, with a screw,well-shaped, whose funnel, puffing a cloud of smoke, indicated that shewas getting ready for departure.Phileas Fogg hailed a boat, got into it, and soon found himself onboard the “Henrietta,” iron-hulled, wood-built above. He ascended tothe deck, and asked for the captain, who forthwith presented himself.He was a man of fifty, a sort of sea-wolf, with big eyes, a complexionof oxidised copper, red hair and thick neck, and a growling voice.“The captain?” asked Mr. Fogg.“I am the captain.”“I am Phileas Fogg, of London.”“And I am Andrew Speedy, of Cardiff.”“You are going to put to sea?”“In an hour.”“You are bound for—”“Bordeaux.”“And your cargo?”“No freight. Going in ballast.”“Have you any passengers?”“No passengers. Never have passengers. Too much in the way.”“Is your vessel a swift one?”“Between eleven and twelve knots. The “Henrietta,” well known.”“Will you carry me and three other persons to Liverpool?”“To Liverpool? Why not to China?”“I said Liverpool.”“No!”“No?”“No. I am setting out for Bordeaux, and shall go to Bordeaux.”“Money is no object?”“None.”The captain spoke in a tone which did not admit of a reply.“But the owners of the ‘Henrietta’—” resumed Phileas Fogg.“The owners are myself,” replied the captain. “The vessel belongs tome.”“I will freight it for you.”“No.”“I will buy it of you.”“No.”Phileas Fogg did not betray the least disappointment; but the situationwas a grave one. It was not at New York as at Hong Kong, nor with thecaptain of the “Henrietta” as with the captain of the “Tankadere.” Upto this time money had smoothed away every obstacle. Now money failed.Still, some means must be found to cross the Atlantic on a boat, unlessby balloon—which would have been venturesome, besides not being capableof being put in practice. It seemed that Phileas Fogg had an idea, forhe said to the captain, “Well, will you carry me to Bordeaux?”“No, not if you paid me two hundred dollars.”“I offer you two thousand.”“Apiece?”“Apiece.”“And there are four of you?”“Four.”Captain Speedy began to scratch his head. There were eight thousanddollars to gain, without changing his route; for which it was wellworth conquering the repugnance he had for all kinds of passengers.Besides, passengers at two thousand dollars are no longer passengers,but valuable merchandise. “I start at nine o’clock,” said CaptainSpeedy, simply. “Are you and your party ready?”“We will be on board at nine o’clock,” replied, no less simply, Mr.Fogg.It was half-past eight. To disembark from the “Henrietta,” jump into ahack, hurry to the St. Nicholas, and return with Aouda, Passepartout,and even the inseparable Fix was the work of a brief time, and wasperformed by Mr. Fogg with the coolness which never abandoned him. Theywere on board when the “Henrietta” made ready to weigh anchor.When Passepartout heard what this last voyage was going to cost, heuttered a prolonged “Oh!” which extended throughout his vocal gamut.As for Fix, he said to himself that the Bank of England would certainlynot come out of this affair well indemnified. When they reachedEngland, even if Mr. Fogg did not throw some handfuls of bank-billsinto the sea, more than seven thousand pounds would have been spent!CHAPTER XXXIII.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG SHOWS HIMSELF EQUAL TO THE OCCASIONAn hour after, the “Henrietta” passed the lighthouse which marks theentrance of the Hudson, turned the point of Sandy Hook, and put to sea.During the day she skirted Long Island, passed Fire Island, anddirected her course rapidly eastward.At noon the next day, a man mounted the bridge to ascertain thevessel’s position. It might be thought that this was Captain Speedy.Not the least in the world. It was Phileas Fogg, Esquire. As forCaptain Speedy, he was shut up in his cabin under lock and key, and wasuttering loud cries, which signified an anger at once pardonable andexcessive.What had happened was very simple. Phileas Fogg wished to go toLiverpool, but the captain would not carry him there. Then Phileas Fogghad taken passage for Bordeaux, and, during the thirty hours he hadbeen on board, had so shrewdly managed with his banknotes that thesailors and stokers, who were only an occasional crew, and were not onthe best terms with the captain, went over to him in a body. This waswhy Phileas Fogg was in command instead of Captain Speedy; why thecaptain was a prisoner in his cabin; and why, in short, the “Henrietta”was directing her course towards Liverpool. It was very clear, to seeMr. Fogg manage the craft, that he had been a sailor.How the adventure ended will be seen anon. Aouda was anxious, thoughshe said nothing. As for Passepartout, he thought Mr. Fogg’s manœuvresimply glorious. The captain had said “between eleven and twelveknots,” and the “Henrietta” confirmed his prediction.If, then—for there were “ifs” still—the sea did not become tooboisterous, if the wind did not veer round to the east, if no accidenthappened to the boat or its machinery, the “Henrietta” might cross thethree thousand miles from New York to Liverpool in the nine days,between the 12th and the 21st of December. It is true that, oncearrived, the affair on board the “Henrietta,” added to that of the Bankof England, might create more difficulties for Mr. Fogg than heimagined or could desire.During the first days, they went along smoothly enough. The sea was notvery unpropitious, the wind seemed stationary in the north-east, thesails were hoisted, and the “Henrietta” ploughed across the waves likea real transatlantic steamer.Passepartout was delighted. His master’s last exploit, the consequencesof which he ignored, enchanted him. Never had the crew seen so jollyand dexterous a fellow. He formed warm friendships with the sailors,and amazed them with his acrobatic feats. He thought they managed thevessel like gentlemen, and that the stokers fired up like heroes. Hisloquacious good-humour infected everyone. He had forgotten the past,its vexations and delays. He only thought of the end, so nearlyaccomplished; and sometimes he boiled over with impatience, as ifheated by the furnaces of the “Henrietta.” Often, also, the worthyfellow revolved around Fix, looking at him with a keen, distrustfuleye; but he did not speak to him, for their old intimacy no longerexisted.Fix, it must be confessed, understood nothing of what was going on. Theconquest of the “Henrietta,” the bribery of the crew, Fogg managing theboat like a skilled seaman, amazed and confused him. He did not knowwhat to think. For, after all, a man who began by stealing fifty-fivethousand pounds might end by stealing a vessel; and Fix was notunnaturally inclined to conclude that the “Henrietta” under Fogg’scommand, was not going to Liverpool at all, but to some part of theworld where the robber, turned into a pirate, would quietly put himselfin safety. The conjecture was at least a plausible one, and thedetective began to seriously regret that he had embarked on the affair.As for Captain Speedy, he continued to howl and growl in his cabin; andPassepartout, whose duty it was to carry him his meals, courageous ashe was, took the greatest precautions. Mr. Fogg did not seem even toknow that there was a captain on board.On the 13th they passed the edge of the Banks of Newfoundland, adangerous locality; during the winter, especially, there are frequentfogs and heavy gales of wind. Ever since the evening before thebarometer, suddenly falling, had indicated an approaching change in theatmosphere; and during the night the temperature varied, the coldbecame sharper, and the wind veered to the south-east.This was a misfortune. Mr. Fogg, in order not to deviate from hiscourse, furled his sails and increased the force of the steam; but thevessel’s speed slackened, owing to the state of the sea, the long wavesof which broke against the stern. She pitched violently, and thisretarded her progress. The breeze little by little swelled into atempest, and it was to be feared that the “Henrietta” might not be ableto maintain herself upright on the waves.Passepartout’s visage darkened with the skies, and for two days thepoor fellow experienced constant fright. But Phileas Fogg was a boldmariner, and knew how to maintain headway against the sea; and he kepton his course, without even decreasing his steam. The “Henrietta,” whenshe could not rise upon the waves, crossed them, swamping her deck, butpassing safely. Sometimes the screw rose out of the water, beating itsprotruding end, when a mountain of water raised the stern above thewaves; but the craft always kept straight ahead.The wind, however, did not grow as boisterous as might have beenfeared; it was not one of those tempests which burst, and rush on witha speed of ninety miles an hour. It continued fresh, but, unhappily, itremained obstinately in the south-east, rendering the sails useless.The 16th of December was the seventy-fifth day since Phileas Fogg’sdeparture from London, and the “Henrietta” had not yet been seriouslydelayed. Half of the voyage was almost accomplished, and the worstlocalities had been passed. In summer, success would have beenwell-nigh certain. In winter, they were at the mercy of the bad season.Passepartout said nothing; but he cherished hope in secret, andcomforted himself with the reflection that, if the wind failed them,they might still count on the steam.On this day the engineer came on deck, went up to Mr. Fogg, and beganto speak earnestly with him. Without knowing why it was a presentiment,perhaps Passepartout became vaguely uneasy. He would have given one ofhis ears to hear with the other what the engineer was saying. Hefinally managed to catch a few words, and was sure he heard his mastersay, “You are certain of what you tell me?”“Certain, sir,” replied the engineer. “You must remember that, since westarted, we have kept up hot fires in all our furnaces, and, though wehad coal enough to go on short steam from New York to Bordeaux, wehaven’t enough to go with all steam from New York to Liverpool.” “Iwill consider,” replied Mr. Fogg.Passepartout understood it all; he was seized with mortal anxiety. Thecoal was giving out! “Ah, if my master can get over that,” muttered he,“he’ll be a famous man!” He could not help imparting to Fix what he hadoverheard.“Then you believe that we really are going to Liverpool?”“Of course.”“Ass!” replied the detective, shrugging his shoulders and turning onhis heel.Passepartout was on the point of vigorously resenting the epithet, thereason of which he could not for the life of him comprehend; but hereflected that the unfortunate Fix was probably very much disappointedand humiliated in his self-esteem, after having so awkwardly followed afalse scent around the world, and refrained.And now what course would Phileas Fogg adopt? It was difficult toimagine. Nevertheless he seemed to have decided upon one, for thatevening he sent for the engineer, and said to him, “Feed all the firesuntil the coal is exhausted.”A few moments after, the funnel of the “Henrietta” vomited forthtorrents of smoke. The vessel continued to proceed with all steam on;but on the 18th, the engineer, as he had predicted, announced that thecoal would give out in the course of the day.“Do not let the fires go down,” replied Mr. Fogg. “Keep them up to thelast. Let the valves be filled.”Towards noon Phileas Fogg, having ascertained their position, calledPassepartout, and ordered him to go for Captain Speedy. It was as ifthe honest fellow had been commanded to unchain a tiger. He went to thepoop, saying to himself, “He will be like a madman!”In a few moments, with cries and oaths, a bomb appeared on thepoop-deck. The bomb was Captain Speedy. It was clear that he was on thepoint of bursting. “Where are we?” were the first words his angerpermitted him to utter. Had the poor man been an apoplectic, he couldnever have recovered from his paroxysm of wrath.“Where are we?” he repeated, with purple face.“Seven hundred and seven miles from Liverpool,” replied Mr. Fogg, withimperturbable calmness.“Pirate!” cried Captain Speedy.“I have sent for you, sir—”“Pickaroon!”“—sir,” continued Mr. Fogg, “to ask you to sell me your vessel.”“No! By all the devils, no!”“But I shall be obliged to burn her.”“Burn the ‘Henrietta’!”“Yes; at least the upper part of her. The coal has given out.”“Burn my vessel!” cried Captain Speedy, who could scarcely pronouncethe words. “A vessel worth fifty thousand dollars!”“Here are sixty thousand,” replied Phileas Fogg, handing the captain aroll of bank-bills. This had a prodigious effect on Andrew Speedy. AnAmerican can scarcely remain unmoved at the sight of sixty thousanddollars. The captain forgot in an instant his anger, his imprisonment,and all his grudges against his passenger. The “Henrietta” was twentyyears old; it was a great bargain. The bomb would not go off after all.Mr. Fogg had taken away the match.“And I shall still have the iron hull,” said the captain in a softertone.“The iron hull and the engine. Is it agreed?”“Agreed.”And Andrew Speedy, seizing the banknotes, counted them and consignedthem to his pocket.During this colloquy, Passepartout was as white as a sheet, and Fixseemed on the point of having an apoplectic fit. Nearly twenty thousandpounds had been expended, and Fogg left the hull and engine to thecaptain, that is, near the whole value of the craft! It was true,however, that fifty-five thousand pounds had been stolen from the Bank.When Andrew Speedy had pocketed the money, Mr. Fogg said to him, “Don’tlet this astonish you, sir. You must know that I shall lose twentythousand pounds, unless I arrive in London by a quarter before nine onthe evening of the 21st of December. I missed the steamer at New York,and as you refused to take me to Liverpool—”“And I did well!” cried Andrew Speedy; “for I have gained at leastforty thousand dollars by it!” He added, more sedately, “Do you knowone thing, Captain—”“Fogg.”“Captain Fogg, you’ve got something of the Yankee about you.”And, having paid his passenger what he considered a high compliment, hewas going away, when Mr. Fogg said, “The vessel now belongs to me?”“Certainly, from the keel to the truck of the masts—all the wood, thatis.”“Very well. Have the interior seats, bunks, and frames pulled down, andburn them.”It was necessary to have dry wood to keep the steam up to the adequatepressure, and on that day the poop, cabins, bunks, and the spare deckwere sacrificed. On the next day, the 19th of December, the masts,rafts, and spars were burned; the crew worked lustily, keeping up thefires. Passepartout hewed, cut, and sawed away with all his might.There was a perfect rage for demolition.The railings, fittings, the greater part of the deck, and top sidesdisappeared on the 20th, and the “Henrietta” was now only a flat hulk.But on this day they sighted the Irish coast and Fastnet Light. By tenin the evening they were passing Queenstown. Phileas Fogg had onlytwenty-four hours more in which to get to London; that length of timewas necessary to reach Liverpool, with all steam on. And the steam wasabout to give out altogether!“Sir,” said Captain Speedy, who was now deeply interested in Mr. Fogg’sproject, “I really commiserate you. Everything is against you. We areonly opposite Queenstown.”“Ah,” said Mr. Fogg, “is that place where we see the lightsQueenstown?”“Yes.”“Can we enter the harbour?”“Not under three hours. Only at high tide.”“Stay,” replied Mr. Fogg calmly, without betraying in his features thatby a supreme inspiration he was about to attempt once more to conquerill-fortune.Queenstown is the Irish port at which the transatlantic steamers stopto put off the mails. These mails are carried to Dublin by expresstrains always held in readiness to start; from Dublin they are sent onto Liverpool by the most rapid boats, and thus gain twelve hours on theAtlantic steamers.Phileas Fogg counted on gaining twelve hours in the same way. Insteadof arriving at Liverpool the next evening by the “Henrietta,” he wouldbe there by noon, and would therefore have time to reach London beforea quarter before nine in the evening.The “Henrietta” entered Queenstown Harbour at one o’clock in themorning, it then being high tide; and Phileas Fogg, after being graspedheartily by the hand by Captain Speedy, left that gentleman on thelevelled hulk of his craft, which was still worth half what he had soldit for.The party went on shore at once. Fix was greatly tempted to arrest Mr.Fogg on the spot; but he did not. Why? What struggle was going onwithin him? Had he changed his mind about “his man”? Did he understandthat he had made a grave mistake? He did not, however, abandon Mr.Fogg. They all got upon the train, which was just ready to start, athalf-past one; at dawn of day they were in Dublin; and they lost notime in embarking on a steamer which, disdaining to rise upon thewaves, invariably cut through them.Phileas Fogg at last disembarked on the Liverpool quay, at twentyminutes before twelve, 21st December. He was only six hours distantfrom London.But at this moment Fix came up, put his hand upon Mr. Fogg’s shoulder,and, showing his warrant, said, “You are really Phileas Fogg?”“I am.”“I arrest you in the Queen’s name!”CHAPTER XXXIV.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AT LAST REACHES LONDONPhileas Fogg was in prison. He had been shut up in the Custom House,and he was to be transferred to London the next day.Passepartout, when he saw his master arrested, would have fallen uponFix had he not been held back by some policemen. Aouda wasthunderstruck at the suddenness of an event which she could notunderstand. Passepartout explained to her how it was that the honestand courageous Fogg was arrested as a robber. The young woman’s heartrevolted against so heinous a charge, and when she saw that she couldattempt to do nothing to save her protector, she wept bitterly.As for Fix, he had arrested Mr. Fogg because it was his duty, whetherMr. Fogg were guilty or not.The thought then struck Passepartout, that he was the cause of this newmisfortune! Had he not concealed Fix’s errand from his master? When Fixrevealed his true character and purpose, why had he not told Mr. Fogg?If the latter had been warned, he would no doubt have given Fix proofof his innocence, and satisfied him of his mistake; at least, Fix wouldnot have continued his journey at the expense and on the heels of hismaster, only to arrest him the moment he set foot on English soil.Passepartout wept till he was blind, and felt like blowing his brainsout.Aouda and he had remained, despite the cold, under the portico of theCustom House. Neither wished to leave the place; both were anxious tosee Mr. Fogg again.That gentleman was really ruined, and that at the moment when he wasabout to attain his end. This arrest was fatal. Having arrived atLiverpool at twenty minutes before twelve on the 21st of December, hehad till a quarter before nine that evening to reach the Reform Club,that is, nine hours and a quarter; the journey from Liverpool to Londonwas six hours.If anyone, at this moment, had entered the Custom House, he would havefound Mr. Fogg seated, motionless, calm, and without apparent anger,upon a wooden bench. He was not, it is true, resigned; but this lastblow failed to force him into an outward betrayal of any emotion. Washe being devoured by one of those secret rages, all the more terriblebecause contained, and which only burst forth, with an irresistibleforce, at the last moment? No one could tell. There he sat, calmlywaiting—for what? Did he still cherish hope? Did he still believe, nowthat the door of this prison was closed upon him, that he wouldsucceed?However that may have been, Mr. Fogg carefully put his watch upon thetable, and observed its advancing hands. Not a word escaped his lips,but his look was singularly set and stern. The situation, in any event,was a terrible one, and might be thus stated: if Phileas Fogg washonest he was ruined; if he was a knave, he was caught.Did escape occur to him? Did he examine to see if there were anypracticable outlet from his prison? Did he think of escaping from it?Possibly; for once he walked slowly around the room. But the door waslocked, and the window heavily barred with iron rods. He sat downagain, and drew his journal from his pocket. On the line where thesewords were written, “21st December, Saturday, Liverpool,” he added,“80th day, 11.40 a.m.,” and waited.The Custom House clock struck one. Mr. Fogg observed that his watch wastwo hours too fast.Two hours! Admitting that he was at this moment taking an expresstrain, he could reach London and the Reform Club by a quarter beforenine, p.m. His forehead slightly wrinkled.At thirty-three minutes past two he heard a singular noise outside,then a hasty opening of doors. Passepartout’s voice was audible, andimmediately after that of Fix. Phileas Fogg’s eyes brightened for aninstant.The door swung open, and he saw Passepartout, Aouda, and Fix, whohurried towards him.Fix was out of breath, and his hair was in disorder. He could notspeak. “Sir,” he stammered, “sir—forgive me—most—unfortunateresemblance—robber arrested three days ago—you are free!”Phileas Fogg was free! He walked to the detective, looked him steadilyin the face, and with the only rapid motion he had ever made in hislife, or which he ever would make, drew back his arms, and with theprecision of a machine knocked Fix down.“Well hit!” cried Passepartout, “Parbleu! that’s what you might call agood application of English fists!”Fix, who found himself on the floor, did not utter a word. He had onlyreceived his deserts. Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Passepartout left the CustomHouse without delay, got into a cab, and in a few moments descended atthe station.Phileas Fogg asked if there was an express train about to leave forLondon. It was forty minutes past two. The express train had leftthirty-five minutes before. Phileas Fogg then ordered a special train.There were several rapid locomotives on hand; but the railwayarrangements did not permit the special train to leave until threeo’clock.At that hour Phileas Fogg, having stimulated the engineer by the offerof a generous reward, at last set out towards London with Aouda and hisfaithful servant.It was necessary to make the journey in five hours and a half; and thiswould have been easy on a clear road throughout. But there were forceddelays, and when Mr. Fogg stepped from the train at the terminus, allthe clocks in London were striking ten minutes before nine.[1]Having made the tour of the world, he was behind-hand five minutes. Hehad lost the wager! [1] A somewhat remarkable eccentricity on the part of the London clocks!—TRANSLATOR.CHAPTER XXXV.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG DOES NOT HAVE TO REPEAT HIS ORDERS TOPASSEPARTOUT TWICEThe dwellers in Saville Row would have been surprised the next day, ifthey had been told that Phileas Fogg had returned home. His doors andwindows were still closed, no appearance of change was visible.After leaving the station, Mr. Fogg gave Passepartout instructions topurchase some provisions, and quietly went to his domicile.He bore his misfortune with his habitual tranquillity. Ruined! And bythe blundering of the detective! After having steadily traversed thatlong journey, overcome a hundred obstacles, braved many dangers, andstill found time to do some good on his way, to fail near the goal by asudden event which he could not have foreseen, and against which he wasunarmed; it was terrible! But a few pounds were left of the large sumhe had carried with him. There only remained of his fortune the twentythousand pounds deposited at Barings, and this amount he owed to hisfriends of the Reform Club. So great had been the expense of his tourthat, even had he won, it would not have enriched him; and it isprobable that he had not sought to enrich himself, being a man whorather laid wagers for honour’s sake than for the stake proposed. Butthis wager totally ruined him.Mr. Fogg’s course, however, was fully decided upon; he knew whatremained for him to do.A room in the house in Saville Row was set apart for Aouda, who wasoverwhelmed with grief at her protector’s misfortune. From the wordswhich Mr. Fogg dropped, she saw that he was meditating some seriousproject.Knowing that Englishmen governed by a fixed idea sometimes resort tothe desperate expedient of suicide, Passepartout kept a narrow watchupon his master, though he carefully concealed the appearance of sodoing.First of all, the worthy fellow had gone up to his room, and hadextinguished the gas burner, which had been burning for eighty days. Hehad found in the letter-box a bill from the gas company, and he thoughtit more than time to put a stop to this expense, which he had beendoomed to bear.The night passed. Mr. Fogg went to bed, but did he sleep? Aouda did notonce close her eyes. Passepartout watched all night, like a faithfuldog, at his master’s door.Mr. Fogg called him in the morning, and told him to get Aouda’sbreakfast, and a cup of tea and a chop for himself. He desired Aouda toexcuse him from breakfast and dinner, as his time would be absorbed allday in putting his affairs to rights. In the evening he would askpermission to have a few moment’s conversation with the young lady.Passepartout, having received his orders, had nothing to do but obeythem. He looked at his imperturbable master, and could scarcely bringhis mind to leave him. His heart was full, and his conscience torturedby remorse; for he accused himself more bitterly than ever of being thecause of the irretrievable disaster. Yes! if he had warned Mr. Fogg,and had betrayed Fix’s projects to him, his master would certainly nothave given the detective passage to Liverpool, and then—Passepartout could hold in no longer.“My master! Mr. Fogg!” he cried, “why do you not curse me? It was myfault that—”“I blame no one,” returned Phileas Fogg, with perfect calmness. “Go!”Passepartout left the room, and went to find Aouda, to whom hedelivered his master’s message.“Madam,” he added, “I can do nothing myself—nothing! I have noinfluence over my master; but you, perhaps—”“What influence could I have?” replied Aouda. “Mr. Fogg is influencedby no one. Has he ever understood that my gratitude to him isoverflowing? Has he ever read my heart? My friend, he must not be leftalone an instant! You say he is going to speak with me this evening?”“Yes, madam; probably to arrange for your protection and comfort inEngland.”“We shall see,” replied Aouda, becoming suddenly pensive.Throughout this day (Sunday) the house in Saville Row was as ifuninhabited, and Phileas Fogg, for the first time since he had lived inthat house, did not set out for his club when Westminster clock struckhalf-past eleven.Why should he present himself at the Reform? His friends no longerexpected him there. As Phileas Fogg had not appeared in the saloon onthe evening before (Saturday, the 21st of December, at a quarter beforenine), he had lost his wager. It was not even necessary that he shouldgo to his bankers for the twenty thousand pounds; for his antagonistsalready had his cheque in their hands, and they had only to fill it outand send it to the Barings to have the amount transferred to theircredit.Mr. Fogg, therefore, had no reason for going out, and so he remained athome. He shut himself up in his room, and busied himself putting hisaffairs in order. Passepartout continually ascended and descended thestairs. The hours were long for him. He listened at his master’s door,and looked through the keyhole, as if he had a perfect right so to do,and as if he feared that something terrible might happen at any moment.Sometimes he thought of Fix, but no longer in anger. Fix, like all theworld, had been mistaken in Phileas Fogg, and had only done his duty intracking and arresting him; while he, Passepartout. . . . This thoughthaunted him, and he never ceased cursing his miserable folly.Finding himself too wretched to remain alone, he knocked at Aouda’sdoor, went into her room, seated himself, without speaking, in acorner, and looked ruefully at the young woman. Aouda was stillpensive.About half-past seven in the evening Mr. Fogg sent to know if Aoudawould receive him, and in a few moments he found himself alone withher.Phileas Fogg took a chair, and sat down near the fireplace, oppositeAouda. No emotion was visible on his face. Fogg returned was exactlythe Fogg who had gone away; there was the same calm, the sameimpassibility.He sat several minutes without speaking; then, bending his eyes onAouda, “Madam,” said he, “will you pardon me for bringing you toEngland?”“I, Mr. Fogg!” replied Aouda, checking the pulsations of her heart.“Please let me finish,” returned Mr. Fogg. “When I decided to bring youfar away from the country which was so unsafe for you, I was rich, andcounted on putting a portion of my fortune at your disposal; then yourexistence would have been free and happy. But now I am ruined.”“I know it, Mr. Fogg,” replied Aouda; “and I ask you in my turn, willyou forgive me for having followed you, and—who knows?—for having,perhaps, delayed you, and thus contributed to your ruin?”“Madam, you could not remain in India, and your safety could only beassured by bringing you to such a distance that your persecutors couldnot take you.”“So, Mr. Fogg,” resumed Aouda, “not content with rescuing me from aterrible death, you thought yourself bound to secure my comfort in aforeign land?”“Yes, madam; but circumstances have been against me. Still, I beg toplace the little I have left at your service.”“But what will become of you, Mr. Fogg?”“As for me, madam,” replied the gentleman, coldly, “I have need ofnothing.”“But how do you look upon the fate, sir, which awaits you?”“As I am in the habit of doing.”“At least,” said Aouda, “want should not overtake a man like you. Yourfriends—”“I have no friends, madam.”“Your relatives—”“I have no longer any relatives.”“I pity you, then, Mr. Fogg, for solitude is a sad thing, with no heartto which to confide your griefs. They say, though, that misery itself,shared by two sympathetic souls, may be borne with patience.”“They say so, madam.”“Mr. Fogg,” said Aouda, rising and seizing his hand, “do you wish atonce a kinswoman and friend? Will you have me for your wife?”Mr. Fogg, at this, rose in his turn. There was an unwonted light in hiseyes, and a slight trembling of his lips. Aouda looked into his face.The sincerity, rectitude, firmness, and sweetness of this soft glanceof a noble woman, who could dare all to save him to whom she owed all,at first astonished, then penetrated him. He shut his eyes for aninstant, as if to avoid her look. When he opened them again, “I loveyou!” he said, simply. “Yes, by all that is holiest, I love you, and Iam entirely yours!”“Ah!” cried Aouda, pressing his hand to her heart.Passepartout was summoned and appeared immediately. Mr. Fogg still heldAouda’s hand in his own; Passepartout understood, and his big, roundface became as radiant as the tropical sun at its zenith.Mr. Fogg asked him if it was not too late to notify the Reverend SamuelWilson, of Marylebone parish, that evening.Passepartout smiled his most genial smile, and said, “Never too late.”It was five minutes past eight.“Will it be for to-morrow, Monday?”“For to-morrow, Monday,” said Mr. Fogg, turning to Aouda.“Yes; for to-morrow, Monday,” she replied.Passepartout hurried off as fast as his legs could carry him.CHAPTER XXXVI.IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG’S NAME IS ONCE MORE AT A PREMIUM ON ’CHANGEIt is time to relate what a change took place in English public opinionwhen it transpired that the real bankrobber, a certain James Strand,had been arrested, on the 17th day of December, at Edinburgh. Threedays before, Phileas Fogg had been a criminal, who was beingdesperately followed up by the police; now he was an honourablegentleman, mathematically pursuing his eccentric journey round theworld.The papers resumed their discussion about the wager; all those who hadlaid bets, for or against him, revived their interest, as if by magic;the “Phileas Fogg bonds” again became negotiable, and many new wagerswere made. Phileas Fogg’s name was once more at a premium on ’Change.His five friends of the Reform Club passed these three days in a stateof feverish suspense. Would Phileas Fogg, whom they had forgotten,reappear before their eyes! Where was he at this moment? The 17th ofDecember, the day of James Strand’s arrest, was the seventy-sixth sincePhileas Fogg’s departure, and no news of him had been received. Was hedead? Had he abandoned the effort, or was he continuing his journeyalong the route agreed upon? And would he appear on Saturday, the 21stof December, at a quarter before nine in the evening, on the thresholdof the Reform Club saloon?The anxiety in which, for three days, London society existed, cannot bedescribed. Telegrams were sent to America and Asia for news of PhileasFogg. Messengers were dispatched to the house in Saville Row morningand evening. No news. The police were ignorant what had become of thedetective, Fix, who had so unfortunately followed up a false scent.Bets increased, nevertheless, in number and value. Phileas Fogg, like aracehorse, was drawing near his last turning-point. The bonds werequoted, no longer at a hundred below par, but at twenty, at ten, and atfive; and paralytic old Lord Albemarle bet even in his favour.A great crowd was collected in Pall Mall and the neighbouring streetson Saturday evening; it seemed like a multitude of brokers permanentlyestablished around the Reform Club. Circulation was impeded, andeverywhere disputes, discussions, and financial transactions were goingon. The police had great difficulty in keeping back the crowd, and asthe hour when Phileas Fogg was due approached, the excitement rose toits highest pitch.The five antagonists of Phileas Fogg had met in the great saloon of theclub. John Sullivan and Samuel Fallentin, the bankers, Andrew Stuart,the engineer, Gauthier Ralph, the director of the Bank of England, andThomas Flanagan, the brewer, one and all waited anxiously.When the clock indicated twenty minutes past eight, Andrew Stuart gotup, saying, “Gentlemen, in twenty minutes the time agreed upon betweenMr. Fogg and ourselves will have expired.”“What time did the last train arrive from Liverpool?” asked ThomasFlanagan.“At twenty-three minutes past seven,” replied Gauthier Ralph; “and thenext does not arrive till ten minutes after twelve.”“Well, gentlemen,” resumed Andrew Stuart, “if Phileas Fogg had come inthe 7:23 train, he would have got here by this time. We can, therefore,regard the bet as won.”“Wait; don’t let us be too hasty,” replied Samuel Fallentin. “You knowthat Mr. Fogg is very eccentric. His punctuality is well known; henever arrives too soon, or too late; and I should not be surprised ifhe appeared before us at the last minute.”“Why,” said Andrew Stuart nervously, “if I should see him, I should notbelieve it was he.”“The fact is,” resumed Thomas Flanagan, “Mr. Fogg’s project wasabsurdly foolish. Whatever his punctuality, he could not prevent thedelays which were certain to occur; and a delay of only two or threedays would be fatal to his tour.”“Observe, too,” added John Sullivan, “that we have received nointelligence from him, though there are telegraphic lines all along hisroute.”“He has lost, gentleman,” said Andrew Stuart, “he has a hundred timeslost! You know, besides, that the ‘China’—the only steamer he couldhave taken from New York to get here in time arrived yesterday. I haveseen a list of the passengers, and the name of Phileas Fogg is notamong them. Even if we admit that fortune has favoured him, he canscarcely have reached America. I think he will be at least twenty daysbehind-hand, and that Lord Albemarle will lose a cool five thousand.”“It is clear,” replied Gauthier Ralph; “and we have nothing to do butto present Mr. Fogg’s cheque at Barings to-morrow.”At this moment, the hands of the club clock pointed to twenty minutesto nine.“Five minutes more,” said Andrew Stuart.The five gentlemen looked at each other. Their anxiety was becomingintense; but, not wishing to betray it, they readily assented to Mr.Fallentin’s proposal of a rubber.“I wouldn’t give up my four thousand of the bet,” said Andrew Stuart,as he took his seat, “for three thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine.”The clock indicated eighteen minutes to nine.The players took up their cards, but could not keep their eyes off theclock. Certainly, however secure they felt, minutes had never seemed solong to them!“Seventeen minutes to nine,” said Thomas Flanagan, as he cut the cardswhich Ralph handed to him.Then there was a moment of silence. The great saloon was perfectlyquiet; but the murmurs of the crowd outside were heard, with now andthen a shrill cry. The pendulum beat the seconds, which each playereagerly counted, as he listened, with mathematical regularity.“Sixteen minutes to nine!” said John Sullivan, in a voice whichbetrayed his emotion.One minute more, and the wager would be won. Andrew Stuart and hispartners suspended their game. They left their cards, and counted theseconds.At the fortieth second, nothing. At the fiftieth, still nothing.At the fifty-fifth, a loud cry was heard in the street, followed byapplause, hurrahs, and some fierce growls.The players rose from their seats.At the fifty-seventh second the door of the saloon opened; and thependulum had not beat the sixtieth second when Phileas Fogg appeared,followed by an excited crowd who had forced their way through the clubdoors, and in his calm voice, said, “Here I am, gentlemen!”CHAPTER XXXVII.IN WHICH IT IS SHOWN THAT PHILEAS FOGG GAINED NOTHING BY HIS TOURAROUND THE WORLD, UNLESS IT WERE HAPPINESSYes; Phileas Fogg in person.The reader will remember that at five minutes past eight in theevening—about five and twenty hours after the arrival of the travellersin London—Passepartout had been sent by his master to engage theservices of the Reverend Samuel Wilson in a certain marriage ceremony,which was to take place the next day.Passepartout went on his errand enchanted. He soon reached theclergyman’s house, but found him not at home. Passepartout waited agood twenty minutes, and when he left the reverend gentleman, it wasthirty-five minutes past eight. But in what a state he was! With hishair in disorder, and without his hat, he ran along the street as neverman was seen to run before, overturning passers-by, rushing over thesidewalk like a waterspout.In three minutes he was in Saville Row again, and staggered back intoMr. Fogg’s room.He could not speak.“What is the matter?” asked Mr. Fogg.“My master!” gasped Passepartout—“marriage—impossible—”“Impossible?”“Impossible—for to-morrow.”“Why so?”“Because to-morrow—is Sunday!”“Monday,” replied Mr. Fogg.“No—to-day is Saturday.”“Saturday? Impossible!”“Yes, yes, yes, yes!” cried Passepartout. “You have made a mistake ofone day! We arrived twenty-four hours ahead of time; but there are onlyten minutes left!”Passepartout had seized his master by the collar, and was dragging himalong with irresistible force.Phileas Fogg, thus kidnapped, without having time to think, left hishouse, jumped into a cab, promised a hundred pounds to the cabman, and,having run over two dogs and overturned five carriages, reached theReform Club.The clock indicated a quarter before nine when he appeared in the greatsaloon.Phileas Fogg had accomplished the journey round the world in eightydays!Phileas Fogg had won his wager of twenty thousand pounds!How was it that a man so exact and fastidious could have made thiserror of a day? How came he to think that he had arrived in London onSaturday, the twenty-first day of December, when it was really Friday,the twentieth, the seventy-ninth day only from his departure?The cause of the error is very simple.Phileas Fogg had, without suspecting it, gained one day on his journey,and this merely because he had travelled constantly _eastward;_ hewould, on the contrary, have lost a day had he gone in the oppositedirection, that is, _westward_.In journeying eastward he had gone towards the sun, and the daystherefore diminished for him as many times four minutes as he crosseddegrees in this direction. There are three hundred and sixty degrees onthe circumference of the earth; and these three hundred and sixtydegrees, multiplied by four minutes, gives precisely twenty-fourhours—that is, the day unconsciously gained. In other words, whilePhileas Fogg, going eastward, saw the sun pass the meridian _eighty_times, his friends in London only saw it pass the meridian_seventy-nine_ times. This is why they awaited him at the Reform Clubon Saturday, and not Sunday, as Mr. Fogg thought.And Passepartout’s famous family watch, which had always kept Londontime, would have betrayed this fact, if it had marked the days as wellas the hours and the minutes!Phileas Fogg, then, had won the twenty thousand pounds; but, as he hadspent nearly nineteen thousand on the way, the pecuniary gain wassmall. His object was, however, to be victorious, and not to win money.He divided the one thousand pounds that remained between Passepartoutand the unfortunate Fix, against whom he cherished no grudge. Hededucted, however, from Passepartout’s share the cost of the gas whichhad burned in his room for nineteen hundred and twenty hours, for thesake of regularity.That evening, Mr. Fogg, as tranquil and phlegmatic as ever, said toAouda: “Is our marriage still agreeable to you?”“Mr. Fogg,” replied she, “it is for me to ask that question. You wereruined, but now you are rich again.”“Pardon me, madam; my fortune belongs to you. If you had not suggestedour marriage, my servant would not have gone to the Reverend SamuelWilson’s, I should not have been apprised of my error, and—”“Dear Mr. Fogg!” said the young woman.“Dear Aouda!” replied Phileas Fogg.It need not be said that the marriage took place forty-eight hoursafter, and that Passepartout, glowing and dazzling, gave the brideaway. Had he not saved her, and was he not entitled to this honour?The next day, as soon as it was light, Passepartout rapped vigorouslyat his master’s door. Mr. Fogg opened it, and asked, “What’s thematter, Passepartout?”“What is it, sir? Why, I’ve just this instant found out—”“What?”“That we might have made the tour of the world in only seventy-eightdays.”“No doubt,” returned Mr. Fogg, “by not crossing India. But if I had notcrossed India, I should not have saved Aouda; she would not have beenmy wife, and—”Mr. Fogg quietly shut the door.Phileas Fogg had won his wager, and had made his journey around theworld in eighty days. To do this he had employed every means ofconveyance—steamers, railways, carriages, yachts, trading-vessels,sledges, elephants. The eccentric gentleman had throughout displayedall his marvellous qualities of coolness and exactitude. But what then?What had he really gained by all this trouble? What had he brought backfrom this long and weary journey?Nothing, say you? Perhaps so; nothing but a charming woman, who,strange as it may appear, made him the happiest of men!Truly, would you not for less than that make the tour around the world?                    *** 